Chapter 1. A Long-expected Party
When  Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag  End announced that  he would shortly be
celebrating   his   eleventy-first  birthday   with  a   party  of   special
magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton.
Bilbo  was very rich  and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of the
Shire  for  sixty   years,  ever  since  his  remarkable  disappearance  and
unexpected return. The riches  he  had brought back from his travels had now
become  a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk
might  say,  that  the Hill  at Bag  End was  full  of tunnels  stuffed with
treasure. And if that was not enough for  fame, there was also his prolonged
vigour  to marvel at. Time wore on,  but it seemed to  have little effect on
Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they
began to  call him      well -preserved,  but     unchanged      would have been nearer the
mark. There were  some that shook their heads and thought  this was too much
of  a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should  possess  (apparently)
perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.
'It  will  have  to be  paid for,'  they said. 'It  isn't natural,  and
trouble will come of it!'
But so far trouble had not come;  and as Mr. Baggins was  generous with
his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good
fortune.  He  remained  on visiting  terms with  his  relatives (except,  of
course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among
the
hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until
some of his younger cousins began to grow up.
The eldest of  these,  and Bilbo's favourite,  was young Frodo Baggins.
When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to
live  at Bag End;  and the  hopes  of the  Sackville-Bagginses were  finally
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same  birthday, September
22nd.
'You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,' said  Bilbo one day; 'and
then we  can  celebrate our birthday-parties  comfortably together.' At that
time Frodo  was still in his       tweens,   as the hobbits called the irresponsible
twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.
Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given very lively
combined  birthday-parties  at  Bag  End;  but  now  it  was understood that
something  quite  exceptional was being planned  for that autumn.  Bilbo was
going  to  be     eleventy-one,      111,  a  rather  curious  number  and  a  very
respectable  age  for a hobbit (the Old Took  himself had only reached 130);
and Frodo was going to be          thirty-three,   33) an important number: the date of
his 'coming of age'.
Tongues began to wag in  Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming
event travelled all  over the Shire. The  history and character of Mr. Bilbo
Baggins became once again the  chief  topic of  conversation; and the  older
folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.
No one  had  a  more attentive audience than old Ham  Gamgee,  commonly
known as  the  Gaffer. He held forth  at            The Ivy Bush     ,  a small inn on  the
Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before
that. Now that he was himself  growing old  and stiff in the joints, the job
was mainly  carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father  and son
were on very friendly  terms with Bilbo and  Frodo. They  lived  on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.
'A very nice  well-spoken  gentlehobbit  is  Mr.  Bilbo, as I've always
said,' the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to
him, calling him 'Master Hamfast', and consulting  him  constantly upon  the
growing  of vegetables - in the matter of 'roots', especially  potatoes, the
Gaffer was recognized as the  leading authority  by all in the neighbourhood
(including himself).
'But  what about this Frodo that lives with  him?'  asked Old Noakes of
Bywater.  'Baggins is his name, but he's more than  half a  Brandybuck, they
say. It beats me why any Baggins  of  Hobbiton should go looking for a  wife
away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.'
'And no  wonder they're queer,'  put  in  Daddy  Twofoot  (the Gaffer's
next-door neighbour),  'if they live  on  the wrong  side of the  Brandywine
River, and right agin  the Old Forest. That's a dark bad place, if half  the
tales be true.'
'You're right,  Dad!' said  the  Gaffer. 'Not  that  the Brandybucks of
in
Buck-land live   the Old Forest; but they're a queer breed, seemingly. They
fool about  with boats on that big  river  - and that  isn't  natural. Small
wonder that trouble came of  it,  I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is
as nice a young hobbit  as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo,
and in  more than  looks.  After all his  father  was  a Baggins.  A  decent
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo  Baggins; there  was never much to tell  of
him, till he was drownded.'
'Drownded?' said several  voices. They  had heard this and other darker
rumours before, of course; but  hobbits have a passion  for  family history,
and they were ready to hear  it again. 'Well, so they say,' said the Gaffer.
'You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss  Primula Brandybuck.  She  was
our
Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest
of the Old Took's  daughters); and Mr.  Drogo  was his second cousin. So Mr.
Frodo is his first    and   second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying
is,  if  you  follow me.  And Mr. Drogo was  staying at Brandy Hall with his
father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often  did after his marriage (him
being partial to  his vittles,  and old  Gorbadoc keeping  a mighty generous
table); and he went out       boating    on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. '
'I've heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,' said
Old Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.'
I
'And   heard she pushed him in, and  he pulled her in after him,'  said
Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller.
'You shouldn't listen  to all you hear, Sandyman,' said the Gaffer, who
did not much like the miller. 'There isn't no  call to go talking of pushing
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit  still without
looking  further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this  Mr. Frodo
left  an  orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might   say,  among  those  queer
Bucklanders,  being brought  up anyhow  in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than  a couple  of hundred
relations in  the place.  Mr. Bilbo  never did  a kinder  deed  than when he
brought the lad back to live among decent folk.
'But I  reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They
thought  they were going to get Bag End,  that time when he went off and was
thought to be dead.  And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes
on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly
he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers  made  out  proper.  The
