handkerchiefs,  and  the uneaten food (a very small  item). Then a number of
other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and
Tooks, and other  guests that lived or  were staying near.  By mid-day, when
even the best-fed were out and about again,  there  was a large crowd at Bag
End, uninvited but not unexpected.
Frodo  was waiting on the step, smiling, but  looking rather  tired and
worried. He welcomed all  the callers,  but he had not much more to say than
before. His reply to all inquiries  was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo  Baggins has
gone away; as far as I know, for good.'  Some of  the visitors he invited to
come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them.
Inside in the  hall there  was piled a large assortment of packages and
parcels and small articles  of furniture.  On  every item there was  a label
tied. There were several labels of this sort:
For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo,                        on an umbrella.
Adelard
had carried off many unlabelled ones.
For  DORA BAGGINS in  memory  of  a LONG correspondence, with love
from
Bilbo,   on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldest
surviving female  relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine,  and had
written reams of good advice for more than half a century.
For  MILO BURROWS,  hoping it will be  useful, from B.B.,                   on a gold pen
and ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters.
For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo,               on a round convex mirror. She
was
a young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face shapely.
For  the  collection  of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE,  from a  contributor,                         on an
(empty) book-case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than  usual
at returning them.
For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS,  as  a PRESENT,                           on  a  case  of
silver
spoons. Bilbo  believed that  she had  acquired a good  many of  his spoons,
while he was away  on his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When
she arrived later in the day, she took the point  at once, but she also took
the spoons.
This  is  only  a  small  selection of  the assembled presents. Bilbo's
residence had got rather cluttered up  with things in the course of his long
life.  It was a  tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which the
custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible.  Not, of
course,  that the  birthday-presents  were always             new,   there were one or two
old  mathoms      of forgotten uses that had circulated all around  the district;
but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and  kept  those that he received.
The old hole was now being cleared a little.
Every  one  of  the various  parting  gifts  had  labels,  written  out
personally  by Bilbo,  and several had some point,  or  some  joke.  But, of
course,  most  of the  things were  given where  they  would  be  wanted and
welcome. The  poorer hobbits, and especially  those of Bagshot Row, did very
well. Old Gaffer  Gamgee got  two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a  woollen
waistcoat,  and  a   bottle  of  ointment  for  creaking  joints.  Old  Rory
Brandybuck,  in  return  for  much  hospitality, got a dozen  bottles of Old
Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as
it had been laid down by Bilbo's father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted
him a capital fellow after the first bottle.
There was plenty of everything left for Frodo.  And, of course, all the
chief  treasures, as well  as  the  books,  pictures, and  more than  enough
furniture,  were  left  in his possession. There was,  however, no sign  nor
mention of money or jewellery: not a  penny-piece or  a glass bead was given
away.
Frodo had a  very  trying time that afternoon. A false rumour  that the
whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and  before
long  the place was packed with  people who had no business there, but could
not be kept out. Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make                   off
with minor  items not  addressed to  them,  or  with  anything  that  seemed
unwanted  or unwatched.  The road to the gate  was blocked  with barrows and
handcarts.
In the middle of  the  commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo
had retired for a while and left his  friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye
on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely.
'He is indisposed,' he said. 'He is resting.'
'Hiding, you mean,'  said  Lobelia. 'Anyway we want  to see him and  we
mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!'
Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover
their parting gift  of spoons. It did  not improve their tempers. Eventually
they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a  table with a lot  of
papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at
any  rate;  and he stood up,  fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he
spoke quite politely.
The Sackville-Bagginses were  rather offensive. They began  by offering
him  bad  bargain-prices  (as between  friends)  for  various  valuable  and
unlabelled  things.  When  Frodo  replied  that  only  the  things specially
directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very
fishy.
'Only one thing  is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that  is that you are
doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.'
Otho would  have been Bilbo's heir, but for  the  adoption of Frodo. He
read the will carefully and  snorted. It was,  unfortunately, very clear and
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other
things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink).
'Foiled again!' he said  to his  wife. 'And after waiting           sixty   years.
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out
of the study  to see how things were going  on and found her still about the
place, investigating nooks  and comers and  tapping the  floors. He escorted
her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside  her umbrella.  Her
face looked as if  she was in the throes of thinking out a  really  crushing
parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:
'You'll live to regret  it, young  fellow! Why  didn't you  go too? You
don't belong here; you're no Baggins - you - you're a Brandybuck!'
'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodo
as he shut the door on her.
'It was a compliment,' said Merry  Brandybuck, 'and so, of  course, not
true.'
Then they went  round the hole,  and  evicted three  young hobbits (two
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking  holes  in the  walls  of one of the
cellars.  Frodo  also had a  tussle  with young Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo
Proudfoot's  grandson),  who had  begun an  excavation in the larger pantry,
where  he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both
curiosity  and  hope;  for legendary  gold  (mysteriously obtained,  if  not
positively ill-gotten), is, as every  one  knows, any one's for the  finding
