course. Strider seemed to  be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out
from Weathertop, and their stock of  provisions was beginning to run low. It
went on raining.
That night they camped on  a stony shelf with a rock-wall  behind them,
in which  there was a shallow cave,  a  mere scoop in the  cliff.  Frodo was
restless. The  cold and wet had  made his wound more painful  than ever, and
the ache and sense of deadly chill took  away all sleep.  He lay tossing and
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks
of  rock, water  dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling  fall of  a loosened
stone. He felt that black shapes  were advancing to smother him; but when he
sat up he saw nothing but  the back of  Strider  sitting hunched up, smoking
his pipe, and watching.  He lay down again and passed into an uneasy  dream,
in  which he  walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire,  but it seemed
faint  and dim, less clear  than the  tall black shadows that  stood looking
over the hedge.
In  the morning he  woke to  find that the rain had stopped. The clouds
were still thick,  but they were breaking, and pale strips of  blue appeared
between them.  The  wind was  shifting  again.  They  did  not start  early.
Immediately after  their cold  and  comfortless  breakfast Strider  went off
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he
came  back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie
of the land.
When  he returned he was not reassuring.  'We have come too  far to the
north,' he said, 'and we must find  some way to  turn back southwards again.
If we  keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north
of  Rivendell.  That is  troll-country,  and  little known  to  me. We could
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but
it would take  too long,  for I  do not know the way, and our food would not
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.'
The  rest of that day they  spent  scrambling over  rocky  ground. They
found  a passage between  two  hills that  led them into  a  valley  running
south-east, the  direction that they wished  to take; but towards the end of
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark
edge  against  the  sky was  broken  into many bare points like teeth  of  a
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it.
They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so  they
often  despaired of  getting their pony up, or  indeed of finding a path for
themselves, burdened as  they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They  had climbed on to  a
narrow  saddle  between two  higher points, and the  land fell  steeply away
again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder  felt
as if icy claws were  laid upon them.  The trees  and rocks about him seemed
shadowy and dim.
'We  cannot go any further,' said  Merry to Strider. 'I am  afraid this
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully  anxious about him. What are we
to do? Do you think they  will be able to cure him in Rivendell,  if we ever
get there?'
'We shall see,'  answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do
in  the  wilderness;  and  it is chiefly because of  his wound that I am  so
anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.'
'What is the matter with my  master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking
appealingly  at Strider.  'His  wound was small, and it is  already  closed.
There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.'
'Frodo  has been  touched  by the weapons of  the Enemy,' said Strider,
'and there is some poison  or evil at work that is beyond my  skill to drive
out. But do not give up hope, Sam!'
Night was cold up on the  high ridge. They lit a small fire  down under
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as
if stone had once been  quarried there. They sat  huddled together. The wind
blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning
and  sighing.  Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark  wings
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that  sought
him in all the hollows of the hills.
The  morning dawned bright  and fair; the air  was clean, and the light
pale and clear  in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey
longed for the  sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light,
Strider took Merry  with him and went to survey the country from  the height
to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining  brightly when he
returned  with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the
right direction. If they went on, down the  further side of the ridge,  they
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way  ahead Strider had caught a
glimpse  of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from
view, the Road to the  Ford was not far from the River  and  lay on the side
nearest to them.
'We must make for  the  Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only
way to the Ford.'
As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed  slowly down
the southern side  of the ridge; but the way  was much easier  than they had
expected, for the slope  was  far less steep on  this side, and before  long
Frodo was able  to  ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an
unexpected talent  for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many
jolts as possible. The  spirits of the  party  rose  again. Even  Frodo felt
better in  the  morning  light, but every  now  and again  a mist seemed  to
obscure his sight, and he passed his hands over his eyes.
Pippin was a little  ahead of the  others. Suddenly he turned round and
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried.
When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake:
there were clearly  the beginnings of  a  path, that climbed  with many
windings  out of  the woods  below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In
places it was  now faint and overgrown,  or choked  with fallen  stones  and
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used.  It was a path made
by strong arms  and heavy feet. Here and  there old trees  had  been cut  or
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way.
They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest
way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came
into the dark  woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming
out  of a belt of fir-trees  it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply
to the left round the comer  of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came
to the comer they  looked round and  saw  that the path ran on  over a level
strip  under the face of a low  cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge.
Outside the door they all  halted. There was  a  cave  or  rock-chamber
behind, but  in the gloom  inside nothing  could be  seen. Strider, Sam, and
Merry  pushing with all  their  strength managed  to open  the door a little
wider, and then Strider  and Merry  went in. They did not go far, for on the
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen  near the entrance
except some great empty jars and broken pots.
'Surely  this  is a troll-hole, if ever there  was one!'  said  Pippin.
