view, the Road to the  Ford was not far from the River  and  lay on the side
nearest to them.
'We must make for  the  Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only
way to the Ford.'
As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed  slowly down
the southern side  of the ridge; but the way  was much easier  than they had
expected, for the slope  was  far less steep on  this side, and before  long
Frodo was able  to  ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an
unexpected talent  for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many
jolts as possible. The  spirits of the  party  rose  again. Even  Frodo felt
better in  the  morning  light, but every  now  and again  a mist seemed  to
obscure his sight, and he passed his hands over his eyes.
Pippin was a little  ahead of the  others. Suddenly he turned round and
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried.
When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake:
there were clearly  the beginnings of  a  path, that climbed  with many
windings  out of  the woods  below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In
places it was  now faint and overgrown,  or choked  with fallen  stones  and
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used.  It was a path made
by strong arms  and heavy feet. Here and  there old trees  had  been cut  or
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way.
They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest
way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came
into the dark  woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming
out  of a belt of fir-trees  it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply
to the left round the comer  of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came
to the comer they  looked round and  saw  that the path ran on  over a level
strip  under the face of a low  cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge.
Outside the door they all  halted. There was  a  cave  or  rock-chamber
behind, but  in the gloom  inside nothing  could be  seen. Strider, Sam, and
Merry  pushing with all  their  strength managed  to open  the door a little
wider, and then Strider  and Merry  went in. They did not go far, for on the
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen  near the entrance
except some great empty jars and broken pots.
'Surely  this  is a troll-hole, if ever there  was one!'  said  Pippin.
'Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know  who made the path -
and
we had better get off it quick.'
'There  is  no  need, I think,'  said  Strider,  coining  out.  'It  is
certainly a troll-hole,  but it seems  to have  been  long forsaken. I don't
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.'
The  path  went on again from the door, and turning to the right  again
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead  with Merry. Sam and
Strider came behind, one on each side of  Frodo's pony, for the path was now
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone
very far  before Pippin came  running back,  followed  by Merry.  They  both
looked terrified.
'There  are  trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods not
far below. We  got a sight of them  through  the tree-trunks.  They are very
large!'
'We  will come and  look at them,' said  Strider,  picking  up a stick.
Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared.
The  sun was now  high, and  it  shone  down through the  half-stripped
branches of  the  trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of  light.
They halted  suddenly  on the  edge,  and  peered  through the  tree-trunks,
holding their breath. There stood  the trolls: three large  trolls.  One was
stooping, and the other two stood staring at him.
Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and
broke his stick upon the stooping troll.
Nothing happened. There  was a  gasp  of astonishment from the hobbits,
and then even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said.  'We are forgetting our family
history!  These  must  be the  very  three  that  were  caught  by  Gandalf,
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.'
'I had no  idea we were  anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew
the  story well. Bilbo  and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact
he had  never more than half believed  it. Even now he  looked  at the stone
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them
to life again.
'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew
about  trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with  a bright sun,  and
yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale  of live trolls waiting for
us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament  for a
live troll!'
They  all laughed.  Frodo felt  his spirits  reviving: the reminder  of
Bilbo's  first successful adventure  was  heartening. The sun, too, was warm
and comforting, and the mist before his  eyes seemed to be lifting a little.
They rested for some time in the glade,  and took  their  mid-day meal right
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs.
'Won't somebody give  us  a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't had a song or a tale for days.'
'Not since  Weathertop,' said Frodo. The  others looked at him.  'Don't
worry about me!' he added. 'I  feel much  better, but I  don't think I could
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.'
'Come on, Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more  stored in your head than you
let on about.'
'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But
these old images here  brought it to my mind.' Standing  up,  with his hands
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune.
Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
For many a year he had gnawed it near,
For meat was hard to come by.
Done by! Gum by!
In a case in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.
Up came Tom with his big boots on.
Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon?
For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim,
As should be a-lyin' in graveyard.
Caveyard! Paveyard!
This many a year has Tim been gone,
And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard.'
'My lad,' said Troll, 'this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?
