us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament  for a
live troll!'
They  all laughed.  Frodo felt  his spirits  reviving: the reminder  of
Bilbo's  first successful adventure  was  heartening. The sun, too, was warm
and comforting, and the mist before his  eyes seemed to be lifting a little.
They rested for some time in the glade,  and took  their  mid-day meal right
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs.
'Won't somebody give  us  a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't had a song or a tale for days.'
'Not since  Weathertop,' said Frodo. The  others looked at him.  'Don't
worry about me!' he added. 'I  feel much  better, but I  don't think I could
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.'
'Come on, Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more  stored in your head than you
let on about.'
'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But
these old images here  brought it to my mind.' Standing  up,  with his hands
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune.
Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
For many a year he had gnawed it near,
For meat was hard to come by.
Done by! Gum by!
In a case in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.
Up came Tom with his big boots on.
Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon?
For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim,
As should be a-lyin' in graveyard.
Caveyard! Paveyard!
This many a year has Tim been gone,
And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard.'
'My lad,' said Troll, 'this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead,
Afore I found his shinbone.
Tinbone! Thinbone!
He can spare a share for a poor old troll,
For he don't need his shinbone.'
Said Tom: 'I don't see why the likes o' thee
Without axin' leave should go makin' free
With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin;
So hand the old bone over!
Rover! Trover!
Though dead he be, it belongs to he;
So hand the old bone over!'
'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins,
'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.
A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet!
I'll try my teeth on thee now.
Hee now! See now!
I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins;
I've a mind to dine on thee now.'
But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught.
Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to larn him.
Warn him! Darn him!
A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to larn him.
But harder than stone is the flesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.
As well set your boot to the mountain's root,
For the seat of a troll don't feel it.
Peel it! Heal it!
Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.
Tom's leg is game, since home he came,
And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
But Troll don't care, and he's still there
With the bone he boned from its owner.
Doner! Boner!
Troll's old seat is still the same,
And the bone he boned from its owner!
'Well, that's a warning to  us all!' laughed Merry. 'It  is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!'
'Where did you come  by  that, Sam?' asked Pippin.  'I've  never  heard
those words before.'
Sam  muttered  something  inaudible. 'It's  out of  his  own  head,  of
course,'  said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.
First he was a conspirator, now he's a  jester.  He'll end up  by becoming a
wizard - or a warrior!'
'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!'
In  the afternoon  they went  on  down  the  woods. They were  probably
following the very track  that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many
years before.  After a  few miles they came  out on the top  of a high  bank
above the  Road. At this point  the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and
winding eastward among woods and heather-covered slopes towards the Ford
and
the  Mountains.  Not far  down the bank Strider pointed out a  stone in  the
grass.  On  it roughly  cut  and  now  much weathered  could  still be  seen
dwarf-runes and secret marks.
'There!' said  Merry.  'That  must be the stone  that marked  the place
where the  trolls' gold  was  hidden.  How much is  left of Bilbo's share, I
wonder, Frodo?'
Frodo looked at the stone,  and wished that  Bilbo had brought home  no
treasure more perilous, nor  less easy to pan with. 'None  at all,' he said.
'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it
came from robbers.'
The Road lay quiet under the long  shadows of early  evening. There was
no sign of any  other  travellers  to be  seen. As  there  was now no  other
possible course for them to  take,  they climbed down  the bank, and turning
