Tom's leg is game, since home he came,
And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
But Troll don't care, and he's still there
With the bone he boned from its owner.
Doner! Boner!
Troll's old seat is still the same,
And the bone he boned from its owner!
'Well, that's a warning to  us all!' laughed Merry. 'It  is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!'
'Where did you come  by  that, Sam?' asked Pippin.  'I've  never  heard
those words before.'
Sam  muttered  something  inaudible. 'It's  out of  his  own  head,  of
course,'  said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.
First he was a conspirator, now he's a  jester.  He'll end up  by becoming a
wizard - or a warrior!'
'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!'
In  the afternoon  they went  on  down  the  woods. They were  probably
following the very track  that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many
years before.  After a  few miles they came  out on the top  of a high  bank
above the  Road. At this point  the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and
winding eastward among woods and heather-covered slopes towards the Ford
and
the  Mountains.  Not far  down the bank Strider pointed out a  stone in  the
grass.  On  it roughly  cut  and  now  much weathered  could  still be  seen
dwarf-runes and secret marks.
'There!' said  Merry.  'That  must be the stone  that marked  the place
where the  trolls' gold  was  hidden.  How much is  left of Bilbo's share, I
wonder, Frodo?'
Frodo looked at the stone,  and wished that  Bilbo had brought home  no
treasure more perilous, nor  less easy to pan with. 'None  at all,' he said.
'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it
came from robbers.'
The Road lay quiet under the long  shadows of early  evening. There was
no sign of any  other  travellers  to be  seen. As  there  was now no  other
possible course for them to  take,  they climbed down  the bank, and turning
left went off  as  fast as they could.  Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off
the  light  of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to  meet them
from the mountains ahead.
They were beginning  to look out  for a place  off the Road, where they
could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that  brought  sudden fear
back  into their hearts: the  noise of  hoofs behind them. They looked back,
but they could not see far because of  the many windings and rollings of the
Road. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into
the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels.  As they peered out from among the
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and  grey in  the failing light, some
thirty feel  below them. The sound of hoofs  drew  nearer.  They were  going
fast, with a light    clippety-clippely-clip.      Then faintly,  as if it was blown
away from  them by the breeze,  they seemed  to catch a dim  ringing, as  of
small bells tinkling.
'That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening
intently. The other  hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,  but they all
remained  full of suspicion.  They had been in  fear of pursuit for  so long
that any sound from  behind seemed ominous and  unfriendly. But Strider  was
now leaning forward, stooped to the  ground, with a  hand to  his ear, and a
look of joy on his face.
The light faded, and  the leaves on the bushes  rustled softly. Clearer
and nearer  now the bells jingled, and           clippety-clip    came the quick trotting
feet. Suddenly into view below came a white  horse, gleaming in the shadows,
running swiftly. In the dusk its  headstall flickered and flashed,  as if it
were studded with gems  like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind
him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in  the
wind of his  speed. To  Frodo it  appeared  that a  white  light was shining
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.
Strider sprang from hiding and  dashed  down  towards the Road, leaping
with a cry through the heather; but even before he  had moved or called, the
rider  had  reined in  his horse and halted, looking  up towards the thicket
where  they stood. When he saw  Strider, he dismounted and  ran to meet  him
calling out:   Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen!                 His speech and clear
ringing
voice left no doubt in their hearts:  the rider  was  of the Elven-folk.  No
others that dwelt in the wide  world had voices so  fair  to hear. But there
seemed to be  a note of haste or fear  in his call, and they saw that he was
now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider.
Soon Strider  beckoned  to them,  and  the hobbits left  the bushes and
hurried  down  to the Road. 'This is  Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of
Elrond,' said Strider.
'Hail, and well met  at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I  was sent
from  Rivendell to look  for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the
road.'
'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully.
'No.  He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered
Glorfindel.  'Elrond received news that  troubled him.  Some of my  kindred,
journeying  in  your land  beyond the  Baranduin,* learned  that things were
amiss, and sent  messages as swiftly as they could. They  said that the Nine
were abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray bearing a  great  burden  without
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that
can ride openly  against  the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond  sent out
north,  west, and south.  It was thought  that you  might  turn far aside to
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.
'It  was  my  lot  to  take the Road,  and  I  came to  the  Bridge  of
Mitheithel, and  left a  token  there, nigh  on seven days ago. Three of the
servants of  Sauron were upon the  Bridge, but  they withdrew  and I pursued
them westward. I came also  upon two others, but they turned away southward.
Since then I have  searched  for your  trail. Two days  ago I found  it, and
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here
we must  risk the peril of  the Road and go. There  are five behind us,  and
when  they find your trail upon the Road  they will  ride after us  like the
wind.  And they are not all. Where the  other four may be, I  do not know. I
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.'
While Glorfindel was speaking  the  shades of evening  deepened.  Frodo
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever  since the sun began to  sink the
mist before his eyes had  darkened,  and he  felt  that a  shadow was coming
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm.
'My master  is  sick and  wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He  can't go  on
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.'
Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently
