seemed to be  a note of haste or fear  in his call, and they saw that he was
now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider.
Soon Strider  beckoned  to them,  and  the hobbits left  the bushes and
hurried  down  to the Road. 'This is  Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of
Elrond,' said Strider.
'Hail, and well met  at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I  was sent
from  Rivendell to look  for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the
road.'
'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully.
'No.  He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered
Glorfindel.  'Elrond received news that  troubled him.  Some of my  kindred,
journeying  in  your land  beyond the  Baranduin,* learned  that things were
amiss, and sent  messages as swiftly as they could. They  said that the Nine
were abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray bearing a  great  burden  without
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that
can ride openly  against  the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond  sent out
north,  west, and south.  It was thought  that you  might  turn far aside to
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.
'It  was  my  lot  to  take the Road,  and  I  came to  the  Bridge  of
Mitheithel, and  left a  token  there, nigh  on seven days ago. Three of the
servants of  Sauron were upon the  Bridge, but  they withdrew  and I pursued
them westward. I came also  upon two others, but they turned away southward.
Since then I have  searched  for your  trail. Two days  ago I found  it, and
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here
we must  risk the peril of  the Road and go. There  are five behind us,  and
when  they find your trail upon the Road  they will  ride after us  like the
wind.  And they are not all. Where the  other four may be, I  do not know. I
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.'
While Glorfindel was speaking  the  shades of evening  deepened.  Frodo
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever  since the sun began to  sink the
mist before his eyes had  darkened,  and he  felt  that a  shadow was coming
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm.
'My master  is  sick and  wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He  can't go  on
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.'
Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently
in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety.
Briefly Strider told of the attack  on their camp under Weathertop, and
of  the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he  took  it, but he looked  intently at
it.
'There  are evil things written  on  this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe
your  eyes  cannot see  them.  Keep it, Aragorn,  till we reach the house of
Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can -  but all the
more do I urge you now to go on without rest.'
He searched the  wound on Frodo's shoulder with  his  fingers, and  his
face grew graver, as  if what he learned disquieted  him. But Frodo felt the
chill lessen in  his  side  and arm;  a little  warmth crept  down from  his
shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The  dusk of evening  seemed
to grow lighter  about him, as if  a cloud  had been  withdrawn.  He saw his
friends'  faces more clearly  again, and a  measure of new hope and strength
returned.
'You  shall  ride my  horse,'  said  Glorfindel.  'I will  shorten  the
stirrups  up to the saddle-skins, and  you must sit as tight as you can. But
you need not fear: my horse  will not let any rider  fall that I command him
to bear. His pace is light and smooth;  and if  danger presses  too near, he
will  bear  you away with a  speed that even  the black steeds of  the enemy
cannot rival.'
'No, he will not!' said  Frodo. 'I  shall  not ride him, if I am to  be
carried off  to  Rivendell  or anywhere else, leaving  my friends behind  in
danger.'
Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would
be  in danger if you were  not  with them! The pursuit  would follow you and
leave  us in  peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that
brings us all in peril.'
To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's
white  horse.  The pony  was laden instead with a great part  of the others'
burdens, so that they  now marched lighter, and  for a time made good speed;
but the hobbits  began  to find it hard to keep up  with the swift  tireless
feet of the Elf.  On he led them, into the  mouth of darkness,  and still on
under the deep clouded night. There was neither star nor moon. Not until the
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were  by that
time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and  even Strider seemed  by the
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream.
They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards  from the
road-side,  and  fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to  have closed
their eyes when Glorfindel, who  had set himself to watch  while they slept,
awoke  them again.  The sun had  now climbed far into the  morning, and  the
clouds and mists of the night were gone.
'Drink  this!'  said  Glorfindel  to  them, pouring for  each in turn a
little liquor from his silver-studded flask  of leather.  It  was  clear  as
spring  water and  had no taste, and it did not feel either  cool or warm in
the mouth; but  strength  and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs  as
they  drank  it. Eaten after that draught the stale  bread  and dried  fruit
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done.
They had rested rather less than five hours when they  took to the Road
again. Glorfindel  still  urged them  on, and  only allowed two brief  halts
during the day's  march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before
nightfall, and  came  to  a  point where the Road bent  right  and  ran down
towards the  bottom of the valley,  now making  straight for the Bruinen. So
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or
hear; but often  Glorfindel would  halt and  listen  for  a moment, if  they
lagged behind,  and a look of anxiety  clouded  his face. Once or  twice  he
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue.
But  however  anxious  their  guides might be,  it  was plain  that the
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs.  Frodo's
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows  of
ghostly grey.  He almost welcomed the coming of  night,  for  then the world
seemed less pale and empty.
The  hobbits  were still  weary,  when  they  set out  again early next
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and
they
hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage.
'Our  peril  will  be  greatest just  ere  we  reach the  river,'  said
Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind  us,
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'
The  Road  was still running steadily downhill,  and there  was now  in
