time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and  even Strider seemed  by the
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream.
They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards  from the
road-side,  and  fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to  have closed
their eyes when Glorfindel, who  had set himself to watch  while they slept,
awoke  them again.  The sun had  now climbed far into the  morning, and  the
clouds and mists of the night were gone.
'Drink  this!'  said  Glorfindel  to  them, pouring for  each in turn a
little liquor from his silver-studded flask  of leather.  It  was  clear  as
spring  water and  had no taste, and it did not feel either  cool or warm in
the mouth; but  strength  and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs  as
they  drank  it. Eaten after that draught the stale  bread  and dried  fruit
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done.
They had rested rather less than five hours when they  took to the Road
again. Glorfindel  still  urged them  on, and  only allowed two brief  halts
during the day's  march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before
nightfall, and  came  to  a  point where the Road bent  right  and  ran down
towards the  bottom of the valley,  now making  straight for the Bruinen. So
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or
hear; but often  Glorfindel would  halt and  listen  for  a moment, if  they
lagged behind,  and a look of anxiety  clouded  his face. Once or  twice  he
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue.
But  however  anxious  their  guides might be,  it  was plain  that the
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs.  Frodo's
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows  of
ghostly grey.  He almost welcomed the coming of  night,  for  then the world
seemed less pale and empty.
The  hobbits  were still  weary,  when  they  set out  again early next
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and
they
hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage.
'Our  peril  will  be  greatest just  ere  we  reach the  river,'  said
Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind  us,
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'
The  Road  was still running steadily downhill,  and there  was now  in
places much  grass  at either side, in which  the  hobbits walked when  they
could, to ease  their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a place
where the  Road went  suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes
ran  along as they hurried  forward; and there seemed to  be a sound of many
footfalls following their own.  All at once, as if through a  gate of light,
the Road ran  out again from the end of the tunnel into  the open.  There at
the bottom  of a sharp incline  they saw before  them a long  flat mile, and
beyond that  the  Ford of Rivendell. On  the  further side was a steep brown
bank,  threaded  by  a  winding  path;  and behind  that the tall  mountains
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky.
There was still an  echo as  of following feet  in  the cutting  behind
them;  a  rushing noise as  if  a wind were  rising and pouring  through the
branches of the  pines. One moment Glorfindel turned  and  listened, then he
sprang forward with a loud cry.
'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!'
The white  horse  leaped  forward.  The  hobbits ran  down  the  slope.
Glorfindel and  Strider followed  as  rear-guard.  They were only  half  way
across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of
the gate in the  trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined
his horse  in, and halted,  swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and
then another; then again two more.
'Ride forward! Ride!' cried Glorfindel to Frodo.
He did not obey at  once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking
the horse to  a  walk,  he turned and looked  back. The Riders seemed to sit
upon  their  great steeds  like  threatening  statues  upon a hill, dark and
solid, while all the woods and land about them  receded as  if into a  mist.
Suddenly he knew  in  his heart that they were  silently commanding  him  to
wait. Then at  once  fear  and hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle
and gripped the hilt of his sword, and with a red flash he drew it.
'Ride on! Ride on!' cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called
to the horse in the elf-tongue:        noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth!
At once the  white horse sprang away  and  sped like the wind along the
last lap of  the Road. At the same moment the  black horses leaped  down the
hill in pursuit, and from  the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had
heard filling  the woods with  horror in the Eastfarthing  far away.  It was
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends  out from the trees and
rocks  away  on the left four other  Riders came flying.  Two  rode  towards
Frodo: two  galloped madly towards  the Ford  to  cut  off  his escape. They
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as
their courses converged with his.
Frodo looked  back for  a moment over  his shoulder. He could no longer
see  his friends. The Riders  behind  were  falling  back:  even their great
steeds  were no match  in  speed for the  white elf-horse of  Glorfindel. He
looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the
Ford before he  was cut off by  the others that had lain in ambush. He could
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black
cloaks, and they were robed in  white and  grey. Swords were  naked in their
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes  glittered,  and they
called to him with fell voices.
Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No
cry came from him. He shut his eyes  and clung to the horse's mane. The wind
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a
flash of  white fire, the  elf-horse  speeding as  if on wings, passed right
before the face of the foremost Rider.
Frodo heard  the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford.
But the pursuers were close behind. At  the  top of  the bank the horse
halted and turned  about neighing  fiercely. There were  Nine  Riders at the
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before  the  threat  of their
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would  prevent them from crossing as
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge  of Rivendell, if once the
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that  he was commanded urgently to halt.
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse.
Suddenly the foremost  Rider  spurred  his horse forward. It checked at
the water and  reared  up.  With  a  great  effort  Frodo  sat  upright  and
brandished his sword.
'Go back!' he cried. 'Go  back to  the Land of Mordor, and follow me no
more! '  His voice sounded  thin and shrill  in his  own  ears.  The  Riders
halted, but Frodo had not  the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him
with a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To
