rocks  away  on the left four other  Riders came flying.  Two  rode  towards
Frodo: two  galloped madly towards  the Ford  to  cut  off  his escape. They
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as
their courses converged with his.
Frodo looked  back for  a moment over  his shoulder. He could no longer
see  his friends. The Riders  behind  were  falling  back:  even their great
steeds  were no match  in  speed for the  white elf-horse of  Glorfindel. He
looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the
Ford before he  was cut off by  the others that had lain in ambush. He could
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black
cloaks, and they were robed in  white and  grey. Swords were  naked in their
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes  glittered,  and they
called to him with fell voices.
Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No
cry came from him. He shut his eyes  and clung to the horse's mane. The wind
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a
flash of  white fire, the  elf-horse  speeding as  if on wings, passed right
before the face of the foremost Rider.
Frodo heard  the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford.
But the pursuers were close behind. At  the  top of  the bank the horse
halted and turned  about neighing  fiercely. There were  Nine  Riders at the
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before  the  threat  of their
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would  prevent them from crossing as
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge  of Rivendell, if once the
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that  he was commanded urgently to halt.
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse.
Suddenly the foremost  Rider  spurred  his horse forward. It checked at
the water and  reared  up.  With  a  great  effort  Frodo  sat  upright  and
brandished his sword.
'Go back!' he cried. 'Go  back to  the Land of Mordor, and follow me no
more! '  His voice sounded  thin and shrill  in his  own  ears.  The  Riders
halted, but Frodo had not  the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him
with a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To
Mordor we will take you!'
'Go back!' he whispered.
'The Ring! The  Ring!'  they cried with  deadly voices; and immediately
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two
others.
'By Elbereth  and L®thien  the Fair,' said Frodo  with  a last  effort,
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!'
Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in
his  stirrups, and raised up his hand.  Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his
tongue  cleave to  his mouth,  and  his heart labouring. His sword broke and
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore.
At that moment there  came a roaring and  a rushing: a  noise  of  loud
waters rolling many stones. Dimly  Frodo saw the river below him  rise,  and
down along its course there  came a  plumed cavalry of  waves.  White flames
seemed to Frodo to  flicker on their crests  and he half fancied that he saw
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three
Riders  that  were still in  the midst of  the  Ford were  overwhelmed: they
disappeared, buried suddenly under angry  foam.  Those that were behind drew
back in dismay.
With his  last failing senses Frodo  heard cries,  and it seemed to him
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure
of white light;  and behind it ran small shadowy forms  waving flames,  that
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world.
The  black  horses were  filled  with madness, and leaping  forward  in
terror  they bore their riders  into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo
felt himself  falling,  and  the  roaring and  confusion seemed  to rise and
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more.
* BOOK II *
Chapter 1. Many Meetings
Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that  he
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge
of memory. Or  perhaps he  had been ill? But  the ceiling looked strange; it
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay  a little while longer
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the  sound of a
waterfall.
`Where am  I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the  ceiling. 'In
the  House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in  the morning.' said  a voice.
`It is the morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want to know.'
`Gandalf!'  cried  Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.
`Yes,' he said, `I am here.  And you  are lucky  to be here, too, after
all the absurd  things you  have done since  you left home.' Frodo lay  down
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did
not think he would get the better of  an argument.  He  was fully awake now,
and  the memory of  his  journey  was returning: the  disastrous `short cut'
through the Old Forest the `accident' at           The Prancing Pony        ;  and his madness
in putting  on the Ring  in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these  things and trying  in  vain to  bring  his memory down to  his
arriving  in  Rivendell, there  was a long  silence, broken only by the soft
puffs of Gandalf's pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the window.
'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?'
'Yes, they are  all  safe  and sound,' answered Gandalf.  `Sam was here
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.'
`What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. `It all seemed so dim somehow;
and it still does.'
'Yes,  it  would.  You were beginning to fade,' answered  Gandalf. 'The
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you  would have
been
beyond  our aid.  But you have some strength in you, my dear  hobbit! As you
showed in the  Barrow. That was touch and  go: perhaps  the  most  dangerous
