* BOOK II *
Chapter 1. Many Meetings
Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that  he
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge
of memory. Or  perhaps he  had been ill? But  the ceiling looked strange; it
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay  a little while longer
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the  sound of a
waterfall.
`Where am  I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the  ceiling. 'In
the  House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in  the morning.' said  a voice.
`It is the morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want to know.'
`Gandalf!'  cried  Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.
`Yes,' he said, `I am here.  And you  are lucky  to be here, too, after
all the absurd  things you  have done since  you left home.' Frodo lay  down
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did
not think he would get the better of  an argument.  He  was fully awake now,
and  the memory of  his  journey  was returning: the  disastrous `short cut'
through the Old Forest the `accident' at           The Prancing Pony        ;  and his madness
in putting  on the Ring  in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these  things and trying  in  vain to  bring  his memory down to  his
arriving  in  Rivendell, there  was a long  silence, broken only by the soft
puffs of Gandalf's pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the window.
'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?'
'Yes, they are  all  safe  and sound,' answered Gandalf.  `Sam was here
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.'
`What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. `It all seemed so dim somehow;
and it still does.'
'Yes,  it  would.  You were beginning to fade,' answered  Gandalf. 'The
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you  would have
been
beyond  our aid.  But you have some strength in you, my dear  hobbit! As you
showed in the  Barrow. That was touch and  go: perhaps  the  most  dangerous
moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.'
'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. `I have not spoken
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?'
'You have talked long  in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and
it  has not been hard  for me to  read  your mind and memory. Do not  worry!
Though I said  "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and
of the others. It is  no small  feat to have come so far,  and  through such
dangers, still bearing the Ring.'
'We should  never  have done it  without Strider,' said Frodo. `But  we
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.'
'I was delayed,'  said Gandalf, `and that  nearly proved our  ruin. And
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.'
'I wish you would tell me what happened!'
'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything
today, by Elrond's orders.'
`But  talking would stop me thinking and wondering,  which are quite as
tiring,' said Frodo.  'I am wide awake  now, and  I remember so many  things
that want explaining. Why  were you delayed?  You  ought to tell me that  at
least.'
'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have
a Council, as soon as you are  well enough. At the  moment  I will only  say
that I was held captive.'
'You?' cried Frodo.
'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,'  said the wizard solemnly.  'There are many
powers  in  the world,  for good  or for evil. Some are  greater  than I am.
Against  some  I  have not  yet been measured. But my  time  is  coming. The
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!'
`Then you knew of the Riders already-before I met them?'
'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the Black
Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings.  But
I did not know  that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at
once. I heard news  of them only after  I left you in  June; but that  story
must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.'
'Yes,'  said Frodo, `it was Strider that saved  us. Yet I was afraid of
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we
met Glorfindel.'
Gandalf smiled. `I have heard all about  Sam,' he said. 'He has no more
doubts now.'
'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well,
fond   is not the right word.  I mean he is dear to me; though he  is strange,
and grim  at times. In fact, he reminds  me often of you. I didn't know that
any of the Big People were like that.  I thought, well, that  they were just
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked
like  Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except
perhaps the Breelanders.'
`You  don't know  much  even  about them, if you  think old Barliman is
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his  own ground. He thinks less
than  he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall  in time (as
they say in Bree). But there are few left in  Middle-earth  like Aragorn son
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.'
'Do  you  really  mean that  Strider is one  of the people of  the  old
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder.  `I thought  they had all vanished long ago. I
thought he was only a Ranger.'
'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. `My dear Frodo,  that  is just what the
Rangers are: the last  remnant in the North  of the great people, the Men of
the  West.  They have helped  me  before; and I shall need their help in the
days  to come;  for we  have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is  not yet  at
rest.'
'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But  so far my  only thought has been  to
get here; and  I  hope I  shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has
been as much as I want.'
He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have
been reckoning,' he said, `and I can't bring  the  total up  to October  the
twenty-fourth. It ought to  be  the  twenty-first. We  must have reached the
Ford by the twentieth.'
'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.
`How do the side and shoulder feel now?'
'I don't know.' Frodo  answered. 'They don't feel at all: which  is  an
improvement, but'--he made  an  effort--'I can move my  arm again a  little.
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left
hand with his right.
