Gandalf smiled. `I have heard all about  Sam,' he said. 'He has no more
doubts now.'
'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well,
fond   is not the right word.  I mean he is dear to me; though he  is strange,
and grim  at times. In fact, he reminds  me often of you. I didn't know that
any of the Big People were like that.  I thought, well, that  they were just
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked
like  Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except
perhaps the Breelanders.'
`You  don't know  much  even  about them, if you  think old Barliman is
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his  own ground. He thinks less
than  he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall  in time (as
they say in Bree). But there are few left in  Middle-earth  like Aragorn son
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.'
'Do  you  really  mean that  Strider is one  of the people of  the  old
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder.  `I thought  they had all vanished long ago. I
thought he was only a Ranger.'
'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. `My dear Frodo,  that  is just what the
Rangers are: the last  remnant in the North  of the great people, the Men of
the  West.  They have helped  me  before; and I shall need their help in the
days  to come;  for we  have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is  not yet  at
rest.'
'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But  so far my  only thought has been  to
get here; and  I  hope I  shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has
been as much as I want.'
He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have
been reckoning,' he said, `and I can't bring  the  total up  to October  the
twenty-fourth. It ought to  be  the  twenty-first. We  must have reached the
Ford by the twentieth.'
'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.
`How do the side and shoulder feel now?'
'I don't know.' Frodo  answered. 'They don't feel at all: which  is  an
improvement, but'--he made  an  effort--'I can move my  arm again a  little.
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left
hand with his right.
`Good!'  said  Gandalf.  `It is  mending  fast. You will soon be  sound
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were
brought in.'
'Days?' said Frodo.
`Well, four nights and three days,  to be  exact. The Elves brought you
from this where you lost  count.  We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has
hardly left  your  side, day or night, except to run  messages. Elrond is  a
master of healing, but the weapons of  our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the
truth, I had very little hope; for  I suspected that there was some fragment
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last
night.  Then Elrond  removed a  splinter. It  was deeply  buried. and it was
working inwards.'
Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife  with notched  blade  that
had vanished in Strider's  hands. `Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf.  `It  is
gone  now.  It  has  been  melted.  And  it  seems  that  Hobbits fade  very
reluctantly.  I  have known strong  warriors of  the Big  People  who  would
quickly have  been overcome by  that splinter, which you bore  for seventeen
days.'
`What would they have done  to me?' asked Frodo. `What  were the Riders
trying to do?'
'They tried to pierce your heart with a  Morgul-knife  which remains in
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would  have become like they are, only
weaker and  under their  command. You  would have became a wraith under
the
dominion of  the Dark Lord;  and he would have tormented you  for trying  to
keep his Ring,  if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it
and seeing it on his hand.'
'Thank goodness  I  did  not  realize the horrible danger!' said  Frodo
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I should
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!'
'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf,  `not  to mention
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced;
and that  was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow
shave, so to  speak. You were in gravest peril while you  wore the Ring, for
then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have  seized
you. You could see them, and they could see you.'
`I know,' said Frodo.  `They were terrible to behold! But why  could we
all see their horses?'
`Because  they are real horses; just as the black robes are real  robes
that they wear to give shape  to their  nothingness when  they have dealings
with the living.'
`Then  why do these black  horses endure such riders? All other animals
are terrified when  they draw  near, even  the elf-horse of  Glorfindel. The
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.'
`Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are orcs and
trolls, there are wargs  and werewolves; and there have been  and  still are
many Men,  warriors and kings,  that walk alive under  the  Sun, and yet are
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.'
`What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?'
`Yes,  at present,  until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear the
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but  never again will they listen to
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live  still some of his  chief
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the  Blessed  Realm
live at  once in both worlds, and against both the  Seen and the Unseen they
have great power.'
'I  thought that I saw  a white figure that shone and did not  grow dim
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?'
'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the
mighty  of  the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord  of a  house of princes. Indeed
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while:
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind
in the Shire. But all  such places will soon  become islands under siege, if
things  go  on  as they are going. The Dark  Lord is  putting forth all  his
strength.
`Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin. while
his beard went  stiff and straight like bristling wire, `we must keep up our
courage. You will  soon be  well, if I do not talk you  to death. You are in
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.'
'I haven't any courage to  keep up,'  said Frodo, `but I am not worried
at  the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell  me the end of the
affair at the  Ford, as I  keep on asking,  and I shall be  content  for the
present. After that  I  shall have  another sleep, I  think; but I shan't be
