all see their horses?'
`Because  they are real horses; just as the black robes are real  robes
that they wear to give shape  to their  nothingness when  they have dealings
with the living.'
`Then  why do these black  horses endure such riders? All other animals
are terrified when  they draw  near, even  the elf-horse of  Glorfindel. The
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.'
`Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are orcs and
trolls, there are wargs  and werewolves; and there have been  and  still are
many Men,  warriors and kings,  that walk alive under  the  Sun, and yet are
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.'
`What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?'
`Yes,  at present,  until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear the
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but  never again will they listen to
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live  still some of his  chief
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the  Blessed  Realm
live at  once in both worlds, and against both the  Seen and the Unseen they
have great power.'
'I  thought that I saw  a white figure that shone and did not  grow dim
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?'
'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the
mighty  of  the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord  of a  house of princes. Indeed
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while:
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind
in the Shire. But all  such places will soon  become islands under siege, if
things  go  on  as they are going. The Dark  Lord is  putting forth all  his
strength.
`Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin. while
his beard went  stiff and straight like bristling wire, `we must keep up our
courage. You will  soon be  well, if I do not talk you  to death. You are in
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.'
'I haven't any courage to  keep up,'  said Frodo, `but I am not worried
at  the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell  me the end of the
affair at the  Ford, as I  keep on asking,  and I shall be  content  for the
present. After that  I  shall have  another sleep, I  think; but I shan't be
able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.'
Gandalf moved  his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo.
The colour  had come  back to his face, and his  eyes were clear, and  fully
awake  and aware. He was smiling,  and there seemed to be  little wrong with
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were
of transparency,  about  him, and especially  about  the left  hand that lay
outside upon the coverlet.
`Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. `He is not half
through  yet,  and to what  he  will  come in the  end  not even  Elrond can
foretell. Not  to evil, I think. He may become  like a glass filled  with  a
clear light for eyes to see that can.'
`You look splendid,' he  said aloud. `I  will risk a brief tale without
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again.
This is what happened, as far  as I can gather. The Riders made straight for
you, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any
longer: you  had become visible to  them, being already on the threshold  of
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save
you,  if  the white horse could  not. The Riders were too swift to overtake,
and too many to oppose.  On foot even  Glorfindel and Aragorn together could
not with stand all the Nine at once.
`When the Ringwraiths  swept  by, your friends ran up behind.  Close to
the Ford  there is a small hollow  beside  the  road masked by a few stunted
trees.  There they hastily  kindled fire; for  Glorfindel knew that a  flood
would come down, if  the Riders  tried  to cross,  and then he would have to
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the  flood
appeared, he rushed  out, followed by  Aragorn and the. others  with flaming
brands. Caught between  fire and water, and seeing  an Elf-lord revealed  in
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their  horses were stricken with madness.
Three were  carried away by the first assault  of the flood; the others were
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.'
'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo.
'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished,  and without them
they  are crippled.  But  the  Ringwraiths  themselves cannot  be  so easily
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your
friends crossed after the flood had passed; and they found you lying on your
face at the top of the  bank, with  a broken sword under you. The horse  was
standing guard beside you. You were  pale and cold, and they feared that you
were  dead,  or  worse.  Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards
Rivendell.'
`Who made the flood?' asked Frodo.
'Elrond  commanded it,' answered  Gandalf. `The river of this valley is
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the
Ford.  As soon as the  captain  of the Ringwraiths rode into  the  water the
flood was released.  If I may say so, I added a few touches of  my  own: you
may  not have noticed, but some of the waves  took the  form of  great white
horses with shining  white riders; and there were many rolling and  grinding
boulders. For a moment  I was afraid that  we  had let  loose too  fierce  a
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand  and  wash you all away. There is
great vigour  in  the  waters  that come down  from the snows  of  the Misty
Mountains.'
`Yes,  it all  comes  back  to  me now,'  said  Frodo:  'the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends  and enemies and all. But
now we are safe!'
Gandalf  looked quickly at Frodo,  but he had shut his  eyes. 'Yes, you
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to
celebrate the  victory at the Ford  of Bruinen, and you will all be there in
places of honour.'
'Splendid!' said Frodo. `It is  wonderful  that Elrond, and  Glorfindel
and such great lords, not to  mention Strider, should take so  much  trouble
and show me so much kindness.'
`Well, there  are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling.
`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.'
`Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily. `I wonder where he is. I wish he was
here and could hear  all  about it.  It would have  made  him laugh, The cow
jumped  over the  Moon!  And  the poor old troll!'  With that he  fell  fast
asleep.
Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That house
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, `a perfect house, whether you like food
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or
a  pleasant  mixture  of  them all'.  Merely  to  be  there was  a cure  for
weariness, fear, and sadness.
As the evening drew on, Frodo  woke up again, and he found  that  he no
