they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a  table with a lot  of
papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at
any  rate;  and he stood up,  fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he
spoke quite politely.
The Sackville-Bagginses were  rather offensive. They began  by offering
him  bad  bargain-prices  (as between  friends)  for  various  valuable  and
unlabelled  things.  When  Frodo  replied  that  only  the  things specially
directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very
fishy.
'Only one thing  is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that  is that you are
doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.'
Otho would  have been Bilbo's heir, but for  the  adoption of Frodo. He
read the will carefully and  snorted. It was,  unfortunately, very clear and
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other
things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink).
'Foiled again!' he said  to his  wife. 'And after waiting           sixty   years.
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out
of the study  to see how things were going  on and found her still about the
place, investigating nooks  and comers and  tapping the  floors. He escorted
her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside  her umbrella.  Her
face looked as if  she was in the throes of thinking out a  really  crushing
parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:
'You'll live to regret  it, young  fellow! Why  didn't you  go too? You
don't belong here; you're no Baggins - you - you're a Brandybuck!'
'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodo
as he shut the door on her.
'It was a compliment,' said Merry  Brandybuck, 'and so, of  course, not
true.'
Then they went  round the hole,  and  evicted three  young hobbits (two
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking  holes  in the  walls  of one of the
cellars.  Frodo  also had a  tussle  with young Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo
Proudfoot's  grandson),  who had  begun an  excavation in the larger pantry,
where  he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both
curiosity  and  hope;  for legendary  gold  (mysteriously obtained,  if  not
positively ill-gotten), is, as every  one  knows, any one's for the  finding
-unless the search is interrupted.
When he had overcome  Sancho and  pushed him out, Frodo  collapsed on a
chair in the hall. It's time to  close the shop, Merry,'  he said. 'Lock the
door, and don't open it to anyone today,  not even if they bring a battering
ram.' Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea.
He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door.
'Lobelia again most likely,' he thought. 'She must have thought of something
really nasty, and have come back again to say it. It can wait.'
He went on  with his tea.  The knock was repeated,  much louder, but he
took no notice. Suddenly the wizard's head appeared at the window.
'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I  shall blow your door right down your
hole and out through the hill,' he said.
'My dear Gandalf! Half a  minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room
to the door. 'Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.'
'Then I  forgive you.  But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap
towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.'
'She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo's
ring. I longed to disappear.'
'Don't do that!'  said  Gandalf, sitting down. 'Do be  careful of  that
ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last
word.'
'Well, what about it?'
'What do you know already?'
'Only  what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and
how he used it: on his journey, I mean.'
'Which story, I wonder,' said Gandalf.
'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'He
told me  the  true story  soon after I  came to live here.  He said  you had
pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. "No secrets between
us,  Frodo,"  he  said;  "but  they are not  to go  any  further. It's  mine
anyway."'
'That's interesting,' said Gandalf.  'Well,  what did  you  think of it
all?'
'If you mean, inventing all that about a "present", well, I thought the
true story much more likely, and I  couldn't see the point of altering it at
all. It was very  unlike Bilbo to do  so,  anyway; and I thought  it  rather
odd.'
'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures
- if  they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful  with it.
It may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.'
'I don't understand,' said Frodo.
'Neither do I,'  answered  the wizard. 'I have  merely begun  to wonder
about the ring,  especially since last night. No need to worry.  But if  you
take my  advice you will use it very  seldom, or not at  all. At least I beg
you not  to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say
again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!'
'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?'
'I am not certain, so I  will say no  more. I may  be able to  tell you
something  when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is good-bye for
the present.' He got up.
'At  once!' cried Frodo.  'Why,  I thought  you were staying  on for at
least a week. I was looking forward to your help.'
'I did mean to - but I have had to change my mind. I  may be away for a
good while;  but  I'll come and see you again, as soon  as I  can. Expect me
when you see me! I shall  slip in quietly.  I  shan't often be visiting  the
Shire openly again.  I find that I have become rather unpopular. They  say I
am a  nuisance  and  a  disturber  of the  peace. Some people  are  actually
accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.'
'Some  people!'  exclaimed Frodo.  'You  mean  Otho  and  Lobelia.  How
abominable!  I would give  them Bag  End and everything else, if I could get
Bilbo back  and go off tramping in the country with  him. I  love the Shire.
But I begin to  wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever
see him again.'
'So do I,' said Gandalf. 'And I wonder many other things. Good-bye now!
Take  care  of  yourself!  Look out  for  me, especially at  unlikely times!
Good-bye!'
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo  thought the old wizard looked unusually
bent, almost  as if  he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing
in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not
see him again for a long time.
