standing guard beside you. You were  pale and cold, and they feared that you
were  dead,  or  worse.  Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards
Rivendell.'
`Who made the flood?' asked Frodo.
'Elrond  commanded it,' answered  Gandalf. `The river of this valley is
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the
Ford.  As soon as the  captain  of the Ringwraiths rode into  the  water the
flood was released.  If I may say so, I added a few touches of  my  own: you
may  not have noticed, but some of the waves  took the  form of  great white
horses with shining  white riders; and there were many rolling and  grinding
boulders. For a moment  I was afraid that  we  had let  loose too  fierce  a
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand  and  wash you all away. There is
great vigour  in  the  waters  that come down  from the snows  of  the Misty
Mountains.'
`Yes,  it all  comes  back  to  me now,'  said  Frodo:  'the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends  and enemies and all. But
now we are safe!'
Gandalf  looked quickly at Frodo,  but he had shut his  eyes. 'Yes, you
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to
celebrate the  victory at the Ford  of Bruinen, and you will all be there in
places of honour.'
'Splendid!' said Frodo. `It is  wonderful  that Elrond, and  Glorfindel
and such great lords, not to  mention Strider, should take so  much  trouble
and show me so much kindness.'
`Well, there  are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling.
`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.'
`Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily. `I wonder where he is. I wish he was
here and could hear  all  about it.  It would have  made  him laugh, The cow
jumped  over the  Moon!  And  the poor old troll!'  With that he  fell  fast
asleep.
Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That house
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, `a perfect house, whether you like food
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or
a  pleasant  mixture  of  them all'.  Merely  to  be  there was  a cure  for
weariness, fear, and sadness.
As the evening drew on, Frodo  woke up again, and he found  that  he no
longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and
probably  for singing and story-telling  afterwards. He got  out of  bed and
discovered that his  arm was  already nearly as useful again as it ever  had
been. He found  laid ready  clean garments  of  green cloth that  fitted him
excellently. Looking  in a mirror  he  was  startled to see  a  much thinner
reflection  of  himself than  he remembered: it  looked remarkably like  the
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping  with his uncle in  the Shire;
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully.
`Yes, you  have seen a thing or two since  you last  peeped  out  of  a
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!'
He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune.
At that moment there  was a knock on the door,  and Sam came in. He ran
to Frodo and took his left hand,  awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it  gently
and then he blushed and turned hastily away.
`Hullo, Sam!' said Frodo.
`It's  warm!' said Sam. `Meaning your hand, Mr.  Frodo. It has  felt so
cold through  the long nights. But glory  and trumpets!'  he cried,  turning
round again with shining  eyes and dancing  on  the floor. 'It's fine to see
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.'
'I  am ready,' said Frodo.  'Let's  go  and  look  for the rest  of the
party!'
`I can  take you to them,  sir,' said Sam. `It's a  big house this, and
very  peculiar. Always a bit more to discover,  and no  knowing what  you'll
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves  here, and Elves there! Some like
kings, terrible and splendid;  and some  as merry as children. And the music
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.'
'I know  what you have  been doing,  Sam,' said Frodo,  taking his arm.
'But you  shall be merry tonight,  and listen to your  heart's content. Come
on, guide me round the corners!'
Sam led him  along several passages and down many steps and out  into a
high garden above the  steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting
in a  porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the
valley below,  but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far
above. The air was warm. The sound of running  and falling  water  was loud,
and the evening  was filled with a  faint scent  of trees and flowers, as if
summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens.
`Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing  up.  `Here is our noble cousin! Make
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!'
'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back  of the  porch. `Evil
things do  not  come into this valley; but all  the same we should not  name
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of
Mordor, whose  power is  again stretching out over the world! We are sitting
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.'
`Gandalf  has been saying many cheerful things like that,' said Pippin.
`He thinks I need keeping in  order.  But it  seems impossible, somehow,  to
feel  gloomy or depressed in  this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the
right song for the occasion.'
`I feel  like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. `Though  at the moment  I
feel more like eating and drinking!'
`That  will  soon  be cured,'  said  Pippin. `You have shown your usual
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.'
`More than meal!  A  feast!'  said  Merry. `As soon as Gandalf reported
that  you were  recovered, the  preparations began.' He  had hardly finished
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells.
The  hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves  for  the  most
part,  though there were a  few guests of other  sorts.  Elrond, as  was his
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.
Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of
whom  so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were
revealed
as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other
two; but his  long  white  hair, his  sweeping silver beard, and  his  broad
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient  legend. In his aged
face under  great snowy brows  his dark eyes  were set like coals that could
leap suddenly into fire.
Glorfindel  was tall and straight;  his  hair was of shining gold,  his
face fair and young and fearless and full  of  joy; his eyes were bright and
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and  in his hand was
strength.
The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was
