summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens.
`Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing  up.  `Here is our noble cousin! Make
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!'
'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back  of the  porch. `Evil
things do  not  come into this valley; but all  the same we should not  name
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of
Mordor, whose  power is  again stretching out over the world! We are sitting
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.'
`Gandalf  has been saying many cheerful things like that,' said Pippin.
`He thinks I need keeping in  order.  But it  seems impossible, somehow,  to
feel  gloomy or depressed in  this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the
right song for the occasion.'
`I feel  like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. `Though  at the moment  I
feel more like eating and drinking!'
`That  will  soon  be cured,'  said  Pippin. `You have shown your usual
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.'
`More than meal!  A  feast!'  said  Merry. `As soon as Gandalf reported
that  you were  recovered, the  preparations began.' He  had hardly finished
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells.
The  hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves  for  the  most
part,  though there were a  few guests of other  sorts.  Elrond, as  was his
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.
Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of
whom  so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were
revealed
as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other
two; but his  long  white  hair, his  sweeping silver beard, and  his  broad
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient  legend. In his aged
face under  great snowy brows  his dark eyes  were set like coals that could
leap suddenly into fire.
Glorfindel  was tall and straight;  his  hair was of shining gold,  his
face fair and young and fearless and full  of  joy; his eyes were bright and
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and  in his hand was
strength.
The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was
written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark
as the shadows of twilight, and upon  it  was set  a circlet  of silver; his
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of
stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale
as  a tried warrior in  the  fulness  of  his strength.  He was the Lord  of
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men.
In  the  middle of the table, against  the  woven cloths upon the wall,
there  was a chair under  a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look  upon,
and so like was she in form of womanhood  to Elrond that Frodo  guessed that
she was one of his  close kindred. Young she was  and yet not so. The braids
of her dark  hair were touched  by no frost, her white arms and  clear  face
were  flawless and smooth,  and the light  of stars was in  her bright eyes,
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge
were in  her  glance, as  of  one  who has known  many things that the years
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with  a cap of silver lace netted
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver.
So it was  that Frodo saw  her whom few  mortals  had yet seen;  Arwen,
daughter  of Elrond,  in whom it  was said  that the likeness of L®thien had
come on earth again; and she was called  Undumiel, for she was  the Evenstar
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin,  in Lurien
beyond  the mountains,  and  was  but  lately  returned to Rivendell  to her
father's  house.  But  her  brothers, Elladan and  Elrohir,  were  out  upon
errantry: for  they rode often far  afield with the  Rangers  of  the North,
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the orcs.
Such loveliness  in  living  thing  Frodo had  never  seen  before  nor
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find  that he
had a seat at  Elrond's table among all these  folk so high and fair. Though
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several  cushions, he felt very
small, and  rather out of place; but that  feeling quickly passed. The feast
was  merry and  the food all that his  hunger could desire. It was some time
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours.
He  looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be  allowed to wait
on his  master, but had been  told that  for this  time he  was  a  guest of
honour. Frodo could see him  now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper
end  of  one of  the side-tables close to  the dais. He could see no sign of
Strider.
Next to Frodo  on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was  white, nearly as white as the
snow-white cloth  of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him.
'Welcome  and well met!'  said the dwarf, turning towards  him. Then he
actually rose from his seat and bowed. `Gluin at your service,' he said, and
bowed still lower.
'Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your   family's,'  said  Frodo
correctly, rising  in surprise and scattering  his cushions. 'Am I right  in
guessing that you are       the   Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the  great
Thorin Oakenshield?'
`Quite  right,'  answered  the dwarf,  gathering up  the  cushions  and
courteously assisting  Frodo back  into his seat. 'And I do  not ask, for  I
have  already been  told that you  are  the  kinsman and adopted heir of our
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.'
`Thank you very much,' said Frodo.
'You have had  some very strange  adventures, I hear,'  said  Gluin. 'I
wonder greatly  what brings          four  hobbits  on so long a journey. Nothing like
it  has happened  since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?'
'I  think  we  will not  speak  of it,  at least not  yet,' said  Frodo
politely.
He guessed that  even in Elrond's house the matter of  the Ring was not
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his  troubles for a
time. 'But  I am  equally  curious,'  he  added,  `to learn what  brings  so
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'
Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I  think we will not speak
yet  of that either. Master  Elrond will summon us all ere long,  I believe,
and  then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that  may be
told.'
Throughout the  rest  of  the  meal  they talked  together,  but  Frodo
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring,
seemed small and far-away and unimportant. while  Gluin had much to tell  of
events in the northern regions of Wilderland.  Frodo  learned that Grimbeorn
the Old, son of  Beorn, was now the lord  of  many sturdy men,  and to their
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
'lndeed,' said Gluin,  `if it were not for  the  Beornings, the passage
