Next to Frodo  on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was  white, nearly as white as the
snow-white cloth  of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him.
'Welcome  and well met!'  said the dwarf, turning towards  him. Then he
actually rose from his seat and bowed. `Gluin at your service,' he said, and
bowed still lower.
'Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your   family's,'  said  Frodo
correctly, rising  in surprise and scattering  his cushions. 'Am I right  in
guessing that you are       the   Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the  great
Thorin Oakenshield?'
`Quite  right,'  answered  the dwarf,  gathering up  the  cushions  and
courteously assisting  Frodo back  into his seat. 'And I do  not ask, for  I
have  already been  told that you  are  the  kinsman and adopted heir of our
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.'
`Thank you very much,' said Frodo.
'You have had  some very strange  adventures, I hear,'  said  Gluin. 'I
wonder greatly  what brings          four  hobbits  on so long a journey. Nothing like
it  has happened  since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?'
'I  think  we  will not  speak  of it,  at least not  yet,' said  Frodo
politely.
He guessed that  even in Elrond's house the matter of  the Ring was not
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his  troubles for a
time. 'But  I am  equally  curious,'  he  added,  `to learn what  brings  so
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'
Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I  think we will not speak
yet  of that either. Master  Elrond will summon us all ere long,  I believe,
and  then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that  may be
told.'
Throughout the  rest  of  the  meal  they talked  together,  but  Frodo
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring,
seemed small and far-away and unimportant. while  Gluin had much to tell  of
events in the northern regions of Wilderland.  Frodo  learned that Grimbeorn
the Old, son of  Beorn, was now the lord  of  many sturdy men,  and to their
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
'lndeed,' said Gluin,  `if it were not for  the  Beornings, the passage
from  Dale  to Rivendell  would long  ago  have become  impossible. They are
valiant men and keep open  the High Pass  and the Ford of Carrock. But their
tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his  head;  `and like Beorn of old
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty,  and that is much
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to  us  as the  Men  of
Dale. They  are  good  folk,  the Bardings. The  grandson of Bard the Bowman
rules  them,  Brand son of Bain  son of Bard. He is a  strong king.  and his
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.'
'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo.
`There is much  to tell, good and bad,' said  Gluin; 'yet it  is mostly
good:  we have so far been fortunate, though  we do not escape the shadow of
these  times. If you  really  wish  to  hear of us, I will tell  you tidings
gladly.  But stop  me when  you are  weary!  Dwarves'  tongues  run  on when
speaking of their handiwork, they say.'
And with that  Gluin embarked on a long  account of the doings  of  the
Dwarf-kingdom.  He  was delighted  to have found  so polite a  listener; for
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject,
though  actually he  soon  got rather lost among the strange names of people
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to
hear that Dbin was  still  King under the  Mountain, and was now old (having
passed  his two hundred  and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich.
Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies  seven were
still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori,  Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at
table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him.
'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo.
A shadow passed  over Gluin's face.  `We do not know,' he answered. 'It
is largely  on account of  Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!'
Gluin began then  to talk  of the works of  his  people,  telling Frodo
about their  great  labours in Dale  and under the  Mountain. 'We have  done
well,' he  said. `But  in  metalwork  we cannot rival  our fathers, many  of
whose. secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but  we cannot
again make mail or blade  to match  those  that were  made before the dragon
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should
see  the  waterways of Dale,  Frodo, and the fountains, and  the pools!  You
should  see  the  stone-paved roads  of  many  colours! And  the  halls  and
cavernous streets under the earth with  arches  carved  like trees;  and the
terraces and  towers upon the Mountain's  sides! Then you would  see that we
have not been idle.'
'I will come and see them, if  ever I can,' said  Frodo. 'How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!'
Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you
not?' he asked.
`Yes,' answered Frodo. 'I would rather see him than all  the towers and
palaces in the world.'
At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down
the hall, and the company followed them in due  order. The doors were thrown
open, and they went across a  wide passage and through other doors, and came
into a further hall.  In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side.
Frodo found himself  walking with  Gandalf. `This  is the Hall of Fire'
said the wizard.  `Here you will hear many songs and  tales-if you  can keep
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people
come here who wish for peace,  and thought. There is always a fire here, all
the year round, but there is little other light.'
As Elrond entered and  went towards  the seat prepared for  him, elvish
minstrels began to  make sweet  music.  Slowly  the hall  filled,  and Frodo
looked  with delight upon  the many  fair faces that were gathered together;
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in  their hair. Suddenly
he noticed, not far from the further  end of  the fire, a small dark  figure
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on  the
ground was a drinking-cup  and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was
ill
(if people were ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable  to  come to the
feast. His head seemed sunk  in sleep on  his breast, and a fold of his dark
cloak was drawn over his face.
Elrond went forward and stood beside the  silent figure. 'Awake  little
master.  he  said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him.
'Now  at last  the hour has come that you have wished  for, Frodo,' he said.
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.'
The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face.
`Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward.
`Hullo, Frodo my  lad!' said Bilbo.  `So  you have got here at  last. I
