cavernous streets under the earth with  arches  carved  like trees;  and the
terraces and  towers upon the Mountain's  sides! Then you would  see that we
have not been idle.'
'I will come and see them, if  ever I can,' said  Frodo. 'How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!'
Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you
not?' he asked.
`Yes,' answered Frodo. 'I would rather see him than all  the towers and
palaces in the world.'
At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down
the hall, and the company followed them in due  order. The doors were thrown
open, and they went across a  wide passage and through other doors, and came
into a further hall.  In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side.
Frodo found himself  walking with  Gandalf. `This  is the Hall of Fire'
said the wizard.  `Here you will hear many songs and  tales-if you  can keep
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people
come here who wish for peace,  and thought. There is always a fire here, all
the year round, but there is little other light.'
As Elrond entered and  went towards  the seat prepared for  him, elvish
minstrels began to  make sweet  music.  Slowly  the hall  filled,  and Frodo
looked  with delight upon  the many  fair faces that were gathered together;
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in  their hair. Suddenly
he noticed, not far from the further  end of  the fire, a small dark  figure
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on  the
ground was a drinking-cup  and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was
ill
(if people were ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable  to  come to the
feast. His head seemed sunk  in sleep on  his breast, and a fold of his dark
cloak was drawn over his face.
Elrond went forward and stood beside the  silent figure. 'Awake  little
master.  he  said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him.
'Now  at last  the hour has come that you have wished  for, Frodo,' he said.
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.'
The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face.
`Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward.
`Hullo, Frodo my  lad!' said Bilbo.  `So  you have got here at  last. I
hoped you would manage it. Well,  well! So  all this  feasting  is  in  your
honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?'
'Why weren't  you there?' cried Frodo.  `And why haven't I been allowed
to see you before?'
`Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by
your  side with Sam each day. But as for  the feast` I don't go in  for such
things much now. And I had something else to do.'
`What were you doing?'
`Why, sitting and thinking.  I do  a lot of that  nowadays, and this is
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!' he said, cocking an
eye at Elrond.  There was a  bright  twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness
that Frodo could see. `Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want
to  know,  you  have  all come  out from your feast too  soon, and  you have
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck  over a line  or
two, and was thinking  about them; but  now I don't suppose I shall ever get
them right.  There will  be such a deal of singing  that  the  ideas will be
driven clean out  of my head.  I  shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to
help me. Where is he?'
Elrond laughed. `He  shall  be found,' he  said. `Then you two shall go
into a corner  and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before
we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast.
In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious
of the mirth and music in the hall about them.  Bilbo had not much to say of
himself. When  he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the
Road or in the country on either side;  but  somehow  he had steered all the
time towards Rivendell. `I got here without  much adventure,' he  said, `and
after  a rest I went on with  the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't
travel again.  Old  Balin had gone away. Then I came  back  here, and here I
have been. I have done this and that. I have  written some more of my  book.
And, of course, I make  up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to
please  me,  I think; for, of  course,  they aren't really  good  enough for
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just
is. A remarkable place altogether.
`I  hear  all kinds of  news,  from  over the Mountains, and out of the
South,  but  hardly  anything  from the Shire.  I heard  about  the Ring, of
course. Gandalf has been here often. Not  that he has told me a  great deal,
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It  is a pity that
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I  could  have brought  the thing here
myself  long ago without  so much trouble. I have  thought several  times of
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they  would not let
me: Gandalf and Elrond,  I  mean.  They seemed  to  think that the Enemy was
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me
tottering about in the Wild.
'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on,  Bilbo. It would do no good
to  you or to others, if you tried to meddle  with it  again." Odd  sort  of
remark,  just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after  you, so I  let
things be. I am frightfully glad to  see  you safe and sound.' He paused and
looked at Frodo doubtfully.
`Have  you got it here?' he asked  in a whisper. `I  can't help feeling
curious,  you know, after all I've heard. I  should very much like  just  to
peep at it again.'
`Yes, I've  got  it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. `It
looks just the same as ever it did.'
`Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo.
When he had dressed, Frodo found  that while he slept the Ring had been
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out.
Bilbo  put  out  his hand.  But Frodo  quickly drew  back the Ring.  To  his
distress  and  amazement he found that he was no  longer looking at Bilbo; a
shadow seemed to  have fallen between them, and through it he found  himself
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.
He felt a desire to strike him.
The music  and singing round them seemed  to falter and a silence fell.
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. `I
understand  now,' he said. `Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have  come in
for this burden: sorry about everything.  Don't adventures ever have an end?
I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't
be helped. I wonder if it's any good  trying  to finish my  book? But  don't
let's  worry about it now-let's have some real News! Tell  me all about  the
Shire!'
Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly  a  shred
