course. Gandalf has been here often. Not  that he has told me a  great deal,
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It  is a pity that
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I  could  have brought  the thing here
myself  long ago without  so much trouble. I have  thought several  times of
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they  would not let
me: Gandalf and Elrond,  I  mean.  They seemed  to  think that the Enemy was
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me
tottering about in the Wild.
'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on,  Bilbo. It would do no good
to  you or to others, if you tried to meddle  with it  again." Odd  sort  of
remark,  just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after  you, so I  let
things be. I am frightfully glad to  see  you safe and sound.' He paused and
looked at Frodo doubtfully.
`Have  you got it here?' he asked  in a whisper. `I  can't help feeling
curious,  you know, after all I've heard. I  should very much like  just  to
peep at it again.'
`Yes, I've  got  it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. `It
looks just the same as ever it did.'
`Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo.
When he had dressed, Frodo found  that while he slept the Ring had been
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out.
Bilbo  put  out  his hand.  But Frodo  quickly drew  back the Ring.  To  his
distress  and  amazement he found that he was no  longer looking at Bilbo; a
shadow seemed to  have fallen between them, and through it he found  himself
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.
He felt a desire to strike him.
The music  and singing round them seemed  to falter and a silence fell.
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. `I
understand  now,' he said. `Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have  come in
for this burden: sorry about everything.  Don't adventures ever have an end?
I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't
be helped. I wonder if it's any good  trying  to finish my  book? But  don't
let's  worry about it now-let's have some real News! Tell  me all about  the
Shire!'
Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly  a  shred
of  memory.  The light  and music  of  Rivendell was about  him again. Bilbo
smiled  and laughed happily. Every  item  of news  from the Shire that Frodo
could  tell-aided and corrected now and again  by  Sam-was  of the  greatest
interest to  him, from the felling of  the least tree to the  pranks of  the
smallest child  in  Hobbiton. They were so deep in  the doings  of  the Four
Farthings that they did not  notice  the arrival of a man clad in dark green
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile.
Suddenly  Bilbo  looked  up. 'Ah, there you are  at last,  D®nadan!' he
cried.
`Strider!' said Frodo. `You seem to have a lot of names.'
`Well,  Strider   is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo.
`What do you call him that for?'
`They call me that in Bree,' said Strider laughing, 'and that is how  I
was introduced to him.'
`And why do you call him D®nadan?' asked Frodo.
` The  D®nadan,' said Bilbo. `He is often called that here. But I thought
you  knew  enough  Elvish  at  least to  know              d®n-udan     : Man  of  the  West,
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!' He turned to Strider.
`Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Lady
Arwen was there.'
Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. `I  know,'  he said. 'But often I
must put  mirth aside. Elladan  and Elrohir  have returned  out  of the Wild
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.'
`Well, my  dear fellow,' said  Bilbo, `now you've heard the news, can't
you spare me  a moment?  I want your help in  something urgent.  Elrond says
this song of mine is to be finished  before the end of the evening, and I am
stuck. Let's go off into a corner and polish it up!'
Strider smiled. `Come then!' he said. `Let me hear it!'
Frodo  was left  to himself  for a while. for Sam had fallen asleep. He
was  alone and felt rather forlorn`  although  all  about  him  the  folk of
Rivendell were gathered. But  those near  him were silent,  intent upon  the
music of the voices and the instruments. and they  gave no heed to  anything
else. Frodo began to listen.
At first the beauty of the  melodies  and  of  the interwoven  words in
elven-tongues, even though he understood  them little` held him in  a spell,
as soon as  he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took
shape, and  visions of  far lands  and  bright things that he had  never yet
imagined  opened out before him;  and the firelit  hall became like a golden
mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the  world. Then the
enchantment  became more and more dreamlike, until  he felt  that an endless
river of  swelling gold  and  silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous
for its  pattern to be comprehended;  it  became part of  the throbbing  air
about him, and  it  drenched and  drowned him. Swiftly  he  sank  under  its
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep.
There  he wandered long in a dream of  music  that turned  into running
water, and  then suddenly into a  voice. It seemed  to be the voice of Bilbo
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words.
Edrendil was a mariner
that tarried in Arvernien;
he built a boat of timber felled
in Nimbrethil to journey in;
her sails he wove of silver fair,
of silver were her lanterns made,
her prow was fashioned like a swan,
and light upon her banners laid.
In panoply of ancient kings,
in chain‚d rings he armoured him;
his shining shield was scored with runes
to ward all wounds and harm from him;
his bow was made of dragon-horn,
his arrows shorn of ebony,
of silver was his habergeon,
his scabbard of chalcedony;
his sword of steel was valiant,
of adamant his helmet tall,
an eagle-plume upon his crest,
upon his breast an emerald.
Beneath the Moon and under star
he wandered far from northern strands,
bewildered on enchanted ways
beyond the days of mortal lands.
From gnashing of the Narrow Ice
