the yellow gold and jewels wan.
He saw the Mountain silent rise
where twilight lies upon the knees
of Valinor, and Eldamar
beheld afar beyond the seas.
A wanderer escaped from night
to haven white he came at last,
to Elvenhome the green and fair
where keen the air, where pale as glass
beneath the Hill of Ilmarin
a-glimmer in a valley sheer
the lamplit towers of Tirion
are mirrored on the Shadowmere.
He tarried there from errantry,
and melodies they taught to him,
and sages old him marvels told,
and harps of gold they brought to him.
They clothed him then in elven-white,
and seven lights before him sent,
as through the Calacirian
to hidden land forlorn he went.
He came unto the timeless halls
where shining fall the countless years,
and endless reigns the Elder King
in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer;
and words unheard were spoken then
of folk of Men and Elven-kin,
beyond the world were visions showed
forbid to those that dwell therein.
A ship then new they built for him
of mithril and of elven-glass
with shining prow; no shaven oar
nor sail she bore on silver mast:
the Silmaril as lantern light
and banner bright with living flame
to gleam thereon by Elbereth
herself was set, who thither came
and wings immortal made for him,
and laid on him undying doom,
to sail the shoreless skies and come
behind the Sun and light of Moon.
From Evereven's lofty hills
where softly silver fountains fall
his wings him bore, a wandering light,
beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.
From World's End then he turned away
and yearned again to find afar
his home through shadows journeying,
and burning as an island star
on high above the mists he came,
a distant flame before the Sun,
a wonder ere the waking dawn
where grey the Norland waters run.
And over Middle-earth he passed
and heard at last the weeping sore
of women and of elven-maids
in Elder Days, in years of yore.
gut on him mighty doom was laid,
till Moon should fade, an orb‚d star
to pass, and tarry never more
on Hither Shores where mortals are;
for ever still a herald on
an errand that should never rest
to bear his shining lamp afar,
the Flammifer of Westernesse.
The  chanting  ceased. Frodo opened his eyes  and  saw  that Bilbo  was
seated  on  his  stool  in  a  circle  of listeners,  who  were smiling  and
applauding.
`Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf.
Bilbo got up  and bowed.  `I am  flattered, Lindir,'  he said. 'But  it
would be too tiring to repeat it all.'
'Not too  tiring  for you,' the Elves answered laughing.  'You know you
are never tired  of reciting  your own verses.  But really  we cannot answer
your question at one hearing!'
`What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were  mine,  and which
were the D®nadan's?'
'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said
the Elf.
'Nonsense, Lindir,'  snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between a
Man  and a Hobbit,  your  judgement is  poorer than  I  imagined. They're as
different as peas and apples.'
'Maybe.  To  sheep  other sheep no  doubt  appear  different,'  laughed
Lindir. `Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other
business.'
'I won't  argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music
and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if you want to.'
He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a low
voice. `It went off  better than  I expected. I don't often get asked for  a
second hearing. What did you think of it?'
`I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling.
`You needn't,' said Bilbo. `As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except
that Aragorn insisted  on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it
important. I don't know  why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing
rather above my head, and  he  said that if I had  the cheek to make  verses
about  Edrendil in the house  of  Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was
right.'
'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It seemed to  me  to fit somehow, though I
can't explain. I was half asleep when you began,  and it seemed to follow on
from  something that I  was dreaming about.  I didn't understand that it was
really you speaking until near the end.'
is
`It    difficult to  keep awake here, until you get used to it;'  said
Bilbo.  'Not that hobbits  would ever acquire quite  the elvish appetite for
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more.
They will be going on  for a long time yet. What  do you say to slipping off
for some more quiet talk?'
`Can we?' said Frodo.
`Of course. This is merrymaking not business.  Come and go as you like,
