would be too tiring to repeat it all.'
'Not too  tiring  for you,' the Elves answered laughing.  'You know you
are never tired  of reciting  your own verses.  But really  we cannot answer
your question at one hearing!'
`What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were  mine,  and which
were the D®nadan's?'
'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said
the Elf.
'Nonsense, Lindir,'  snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between a
Man  and a Hobbit,  your  judgement is  poorer than  I  imagined. They're as
different as peas and apples.'
'Maybe.  To  sheep  other sheep no  doubt  appear  different,'  laughed
Lindir. `Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other
business.'
'I won't  argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music
and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if you want to.'
He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a low
voice. `It went off  better than  I expected. I don't often get asked for  a
second hearing. What did you think of it?'
`I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling.
`You needn't,' said Bilbo. `As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except
that Aragorn insisted  on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it
important. I don't know  why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing
rather above my head, and  he  said that if I had  the cheek to make  verses
about  Edrendil in the house  of  Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was
right.'
'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It seemed to  me  to fit somehow, though I
can't explain. I was half asleep when you began,  and it seemed to follow on
from  something that I  was dreaming about.  I didn't understand that it was
really you speaking until near the end.'
is
`It    difficult to  keep awake here, until you get used to it;'  said
Bilbo.  'Not that hobbits  would ever acquire quite  the elvish appetite for
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more.
They will be going on  for a long time yet. What  do you say to slipping off
for some more quiet talk?'
`Can we?' said Frodo.
`Of course. This is merrymaking not business.  Come and go as you like,
as long as you don't make a noise.'
They  got  up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made  for  the
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a  smile on his face. In
spite of his delight in  Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of  regret as they
passed  out of the Hall of Fire.  Even as they  stepped over the threshold a
single clear voice rose in song.
A Elbereth Gilthoniel,
silivren penna mnriel
o menel aglar elenath!
Na-chaered palan-dnriel
o galadhremmin ennorath,
Fanuilos, le linnathon
nef aear, sn nef aearon!
Frodo halted  for a moment,  looking back. Elrond was in his  chair and
the  fire was on his face like summer-light upon the trees. Near him sat the
Lady Arwen. To  his surprise  Frodo saw that Aragorn stood  beside  her; his
dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed  to be  clad  in elven-mail, and a
star shone  on his breast.  They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed
to Frodo that Arwen  turned towards him, and the light of  her eyes  fell on
him from afar and pierced his heart.
He  stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song
fell like  clear  jewels  of blended  word  and melody. `It  is  a  song  to
Elbereth,' said Bilbo. `They will sing that, and other songs of the  Blessed
Realm, many times tonight. Come on!'
He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the  gar dens
and looked  south across the ravine  of the Bruinen. There they sat for some
while,  looking  through  the   window   at  the  bright  stars  above   the
steep-climbing  woods, and  talking softly. They  spoke no more of the small
news of  the  Shire far  away, nor  of  the dark  shadows  and  perils  that
encompassed  them,  but  of  the  fair  things  they  had seen in the  world
together,  of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the  gentle fall of the
bright year in the woods.
At last there came  a knock  on the door. `Begging  your pardon,'  said
Sam,  putting in his head, `but I was just wondering if you would be wanting
anything.'
`And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied  Bilbo. `I guess you mean that
it is time your master went to bed.'
`Well, sir,  there is a  Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got
up today for the first time.'
`Quite right, Sam,'  laughed Bilbo. `You can  trot off and tell Gandalf
that he  has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it  has been good
to see you again! There are no folk like  hobbits  after all for a real good
talk. I am getting very  old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to
see your chapters of  our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I  think, and
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!'
