`Well, sir,  there is a  Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got
up today for the first time.'
`Quite right, Sam,'  laughed Bilbo. `You can  trot off and tell Gandalf
that he  has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it  has been good
to see you again! There are no folk like  hobbits  after all for a real good
talk. I am getting very  old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to
see your chapters of  our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I  think, and
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!'
Chapter 2. The Council of Elrond
Next day Frodo woke  early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along
the terraces above  the  loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun
rise  above the far  mountains, and shine  down. Slanting  through the  thin
silver mist;  the dew upon the  yellow leaves was glimmering, and  the woven
nets of  gossamer twinkled  on  every bush.  Sam  walked beside  him, saying
nothing.  but  sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder
in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon  their
peaks.
On a seat cut  in  the  stone beside  a turn in the path they came upon
Gandalf and  Bilbo  deep in  talk. `Hullo!  Good morning!' said Bilbo. `Feel
ready for the great council?'
`I feel ready  for anything,' answered Frodo. `But most of all I should
like to go walking  today and  explore the valley. I should like to get into
those pine-woods up there.' He pointed away far up the side of  Rivendell to
the north.
'You may  have  a chance later,' said Gandalf. `But we cannot  make any
plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.'
Suddenly as they were talking a  single clear bell rang out.  `That  is
the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,' cried Gandalf. `Come along now!
Both you and Bilbo are wanted.'
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back
to the  house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten,  trotted
Sam.
Gandalf  led them to the porch where  Frodo had found  his  friends the
evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the
valley. The noise of bubbling  waters  came up  from the foaming  river-bed.
Birds were singing,  and a  wholesome  peace lay on the  land. To  Frodo his
dangerous flight, and  the rumours  of  the darkness growing  in  the  world
outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces
that were turned to meet them as they entered were grave.
Elrond was there, and  several others were seated in silence about him.
Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin;  and  in a corner alone Strider was sitting,
clad in  his old  travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat  by
his side, and presented him to the company, saying:
'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.'
He then  pointed  out  and named those whom Frodo  had  not met before.
There was a younger dwarf at Gluin's side: his son Gimli. Beside  Glorfindel
there were several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of  whom Erestor
was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf  from the Grey Havens who had
come on an errand from Cnrdan the Shipwright. There  was also a  strange Elf
clad in green  and  brown,  Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil,
the King of the  Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a
tall man with a fair and  noble face,  dark-haired and  grey-eyed, proud and
stern of glance.
He was cloaked and booted as if for a  journey on horseback; and indeed
though his garments were rich,  and his cloak was lined with  fur, they were
stained with long travel. He had a  collar of silver in which a single white
stone was set; his locks  were shorn about his shoulders.  On a  baldric  he
wore  a  great horn tipped with  silver that now was laid upon his knees. He
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.
`Here,' said Elrond,  turning  to Gandalf, `is Boromir, a man  from the
South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I  have bidden
him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.'
Not all that was  spoken and debated in the  Council need now  be told.
Much was said of events in  the  world outside, especially in the South, and
in  the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo  had already
heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour  of their
works  of  hand  the  hearts of  the  Dwarves of  the  Lonely Mountain  were
troubled.
`It is now many years ago,' said Gluin, `that a shadow of disquiet fell
upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to
be whispered in secret-: it was said that we were hemmed in  a narrow place,
and  that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers  that are called in  our own
tongue Khazad-dym; and they  declared that now at last  we had the power and
numbers to return.'
Gluin  sighed. `Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too deep we
delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long  have  its vast mansions lain
