his side, and presented him to the company, saying:
'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.'
He then  pointed  out  and named those whom Frodo  had  not met before.
There was a younger dwarf at Gluin's side: his son Gimli. Beside  Glorfindel
there were several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of  whom Erestor
was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf  from the Grey Havens who had
come on an errand from Cnrdan the Shipwright. There  was also a  strange Elf
clad in green  and  brown,  Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil,
the King of the  Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a
tall man with a fair and  noble face,  dark-haired and  grey-eyed, proud and
stern of glance.
He was cloaked and booted as if for a  journey on horseback; and indeed
though his garments were rich,  and his cloak was lined with  fur, they were
stained with long travel. He had a  collar of silver in which a single white
stone was set; his locks  were shorn about his shoulders.  On a  baldric  he
wore  a  great horn tipped with  silver that now was laid upon his knees. He
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.
`Here,' said Elrond,  turning  to Gandalf, `is Boromir, a man  from the
South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I  have bidden
him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.'
Not all that was  spoken and debated in the  Council need now  be told.
Much was said of events in  the  world outside, especially in the South, and
in  the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo  had already
heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour  of their
works  of  hand  the  hearts of  the  Dwarves of  the  Lonely Mountain  were
troubled.
`It is now many years ago,' said Gluin, `that a shadow of disquiet fell
upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to
be whispered in secret-: it was said that we were hemmed in  a narrow place,
and  that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers  that are called in  our own
tongue Khazad-dym; and they  declared that now at last  we had the power and
numbers to return.'
Gluin  sighed. `Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too deep we
delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long  have  its vast mansions lain
empty since the  children of Durin fled. But now we  spoke of  it again with
longing, and yet with  dread;  for  no dwarf has dared to pass  the doors of
Khazad-dym  for many  lives of kings, save Thrur only, and  he  perished. At
last, however,  Balin  listened to  the whispers,  and resolved  to  go; and
though Dbin did not  give leave willingly, he took with him  Ori and Uin and
many of our folk, and they went away south.
"That  was  nigh  on thirty  years ago. For a while we had  news and it
seemed good: messages reported that Moria had been entered and a great  work
begun there.  Then there was silence,  and  no word has ever come from Moria
since.
"Then  about  a  year  ago  a  messenger came  to Dbin,  but  not  from
Moria-from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dbin to his gate. The
Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would
give for  it, such  as he gave  of  old.  And he  asked urgently  concerning
hobbits   , of what kind they were, and where they dwelt.  "For Sauron  knows,"
said he, "that one of these was known to you on a time."
'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And  then his
fell  voice was lowered,  and he  would have sweetened it if he could. "As a
small token only of your friendship  Sauron asks this,"  he  said: "that you
should find this thief," such  was  his word, "and get from him, willing  or
no, a  little  ring, the least of  rings,  that  once he stole. It  is but a
trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good  will.  Find it, and
three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be  returned to you,
and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief,
whether  he  still lives  and where,  and you  shall  have great  reward and
lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse,  and things will not seem so well.
Do you refuse?"
'At that his breath came like  the hiss of snakes, and all who stood by
shuddered, but  Dbin said: "I say neither yea nor  nay. I must consider this
message and what it means under its fair cloak."
' "Consider well, but not too long," said he.
` "The time of my thought is my own to spend," answered Dbin.
' "For the present," said he, and rode into the darkness.
'Heavy have the  hearts  of our  chieftains  been since that  night. We
needed not the fell voice of  the messenger to  warn us that his  words held
both  menace  and  deceit; for  we knew  already that  the  power  that  has
re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the
messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so
he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the year.
'And so I  have been  sent at last by Dbin  to warn  Bilbo  that  he is
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and
draws nearer.  We discover that messengers  have come also to King  Brand in
Dale,  and  that he is  afraid. We  fear  that he may yield. Already war  is
gathering on  his eastern borders.  If we make no answer, the Enemy may move
Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also.'
`You  have done well to come,' said Elrond.  `You will  hear today  all
that you need in order to  understand  the purposes of the  Enemy. There  is
naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without  it.  But
you do not stand alone. You will learn that your  trouble is but part of the
trouble of all the western world. The Ring! What shall we do  with the Ring,
the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we
must deem.
`That is the  purpose for which you are  called hither. Called, I  say.
though  I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You  have
come and are here met, in this very nick  of time, by chance as it may seem.
Yet it  is not so. Believe rather that it is  so ordered  that  we, who  sit
here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world.
`Now, therefore, things  shall be  openly spoken that  have been hidden
from all  but a few  until this  day. And first, so that all  may understand
what is the  peril, the  Tale  of the Ring shall be told  from the beginning
even  to this present.  And I will begin that tale, though others  shall end
it.'
Then all listened while  Elrond in his clear voice  spoke of Sauron and
the Rings of Power,  and  their forging in the  Second Age of the world long
ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full  tale to none,
and  many eyes were turned  t= Elrond in  fear and wonder as he  told of the
Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness
for knowledge,  by which Sauron ensnared them. For  in that time he was  not
yet evil to  behold, and they received his  aid  and  grew mighty in  craft,
whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly
in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was
aware of him, and  hid the  Three which  he had made; and there was war, and
the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut.
