'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures
- if  they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful  with it.
It may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.'
'I don't understand,' said Frodo.
'Neither do I,'  answered  the wizard. 'I have  merely begun  to wonder
about the ring,  especially since last night. No need to worry.  But if  you
take my  advice you will use it very  seldom, or not at  all. At least I beg
you not  to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say
again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!'
'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?'
'I am not certain, so I  will say no  more. I may  be able to  tell you
something  when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is good-bye for
the present.' He got up.
'At  once!' cried Frodo.  'Why,  I thought  you were staying  on for at
least a week. I was looking forward to your help.'
'I did mean to - but I have had to change my mind. I  may be away for a
good while;  but  I'll come and see you again, as soon  as I  can. Expect me
when you see me! I shall  slip in quietly.  I  shan't often be visiting  the
Shire openly again.  I find that I have become rather unpopular. They  say I
am a  nuisance  and  a  disturber  of the  peace. Some people  are  actually
accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.'
'Some  people!'  exclaimed Frodo.  'You  mean  Otho  and  Lobelia.  How
abominable!  I would give  them Bag  End and everything else, if I could get
Bilbo back  and go off tramping in the country with  him. I  love the Shire.
But I begin to  wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever
see him again.'
'So do I,' said Gandalf. 'And I wonder many other things. Good-bye now!
Take  care  of  yourself!  Look out  for  me, especially at  unlikely times!
Good-bye!'
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo  thought the old wizard looked unusually
bent, almost  as if  he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing
in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not
see him again for a long time.
Chapter 2. The Shadow of the Past
The talk did not die down in nine  or even ninety-nine days. The second
disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all
over the Shire,  for a year  and a day,  and was remembered much longer than
that.  It became  a fireside-story for  young  hobbits;  and eventually  Mad
Baggins,  who used to vanish with a  bang and a flash and reappear with bags
of jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long
after all the true events were forgotten.
But in the meantime, the general opinion in the  neighbourhood was that
Bilbo, who  had always been rather cracked, had at  last gone quite mad, and
had run off into the Blue. There he had  undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a
river and  come to a tragic,  but  hardly an  untimely, end.  The blame  was
mostly laid on Gandalf.
'If only that  dratted  wizard will leave young  Frodo  alone,  perhaps
he'll  settle  down  and  grow some  hobbit-sense,'  they said. And  to  all
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the
growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once  began to
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He  refused to go into mourning; and
the next  year  he gave a party  in  honour of  Bilbo's  hundred-and-twelfth
birthday, which he  called Hundred-weight Feast. But that was  short  of the
mark, for twenty guests were invited  and  there were several meals at which
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say.
Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving
Bilbo's  Birthday Party year after year  until  they got used to it. He said
that he did not think Bilbo  was dead. When  they asked: 'Where is he then?'
he shrugged his shoulders.
He lived  alone, as Bilbo had done; but he  had  a  good  many friends,
especially among  the younger hobbits  (mostly descendants  of the Old Took)
who  had  as children been fond of  Bilbo  and often in and out of Bag  End.
Folco Boffin and Fredegar  Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin),  and Merry Brandybuck  (his real
name was Meriadoc, but  that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping
all
over  the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the
amazement of  sensible folk he was sometimes  seen far  from home walking in
the hills and woods under the starlight.  Merry and Pippin suspected that he
visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done.
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of
good 'preservation':  outwardly he retained the appearance  of a  robust and
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. 'Some folk have all the luck,' they
said;  but it was not until Frodo approached the  usually more  sober age of
fifty that they began to think it queer.
Frodo himself, after the first shock, found  that being his  own master
and  the  Mr. Baggins of Bag End  was rather  pleasant. For some  years he was
quite  happy and did not  worry much about the  future. But half unknown  to
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was  steadily growing. He
found himself  wondering at times,  especially in the autumn, about the wild
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his
dreams. He began to say to himself: 'Perhaps I shall cross the  River myself
one day.' To which the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.'
So it  went on,  until his forties were  running  out, and his fiftieth
birthday  was  drawing  near:  fifty  was a number  that he felt was somehow
significant (or ominous); it was at any  rate at that age that adventure had
suddenly  befallen  Bilbo. Frodo began to feel  restless, and the  old paths
seemed too well-trodden. He  looked at maps, and  wondered  what lay  beyond
their edges: maps made  in the Shire showed  mostly  white spaces beyond its
borders.  He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking
and talking with the strange  wayfarers that began at this time to appear in
the Shire.
There were rumours of  strange things happening in the  world  outside;
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the
Shire, could  now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,
passing and  not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and  were  no
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road
in  unusual numbers. The ancient East-West Road ran through the Shire to its
end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their
mines in the Blue Mountains. They  were the  hobbits' chief  source of  news
from distant parts - if they  wanted any: as a rule  dwarves said little and
hobbits  asked  no  more.  But now Frodo  often met strange dwarves  of  far
countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in
