messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so
he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the year.
'And so I  have been  sent at last by Dbin  to warn  Bilbo  that  he is
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and
draws nearer.  We discover that messengers  have come also to King  Brand in
Dale,  and  that he is  afraid. We  fear  that he may yield. Already war  is
gathering on  his eastern borders.  If we make no answer, the Enemy may move
Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also.'
`You  have done well to come,' said Elrond.  `You will  hear today  all
that you need in order to  understand  the purposes of the  Enemy. There  is
naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without  it.  But
you do not stand alone. You will learn that your  trouble is but part of the
trouble of all the western world. The Ring! What shall we do  with the Ring,
the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we
must deem.
`That is the  purpose for which you are  called hither. Called, I  say.
though  I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You  have
come and are here met, in this very nick  of time, by chance as it may seem.
Yet it  is not so. Believe rather that it is  so ordered  that  we, who  sit
here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world.
`Now, therefore, things  shall be  openly spoken that  have been hidden
from all  but a few  until this  day. And first, so that all  may understand
what is the  peril, the  Tale  of the Ring shall be told  from the beginning
even  to this present.  And I will begin that tale, though others  shall end
it.'
Then all listened while  Elrond in his clear voice  spoke of Sauron and
the Rings of Power,  and  their forging in the  Second Age of the world long
ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full  tale to none,
and  many eyes were turned  t= Elrond in  fear and wonder as he  told of the
Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness
for knowledge,  by which Sauron ensnared them. For  in that time he was  not
yet evil to  behold, and they received his  aid  and  grew mighty in  craft,
whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly
in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was
aware of him, and  hid the  Three which  he had made; and there was war, and
the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut.
Then through all the years that followed he  traced the Ring; but since
that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond  himself  set it down in
his books of lore,  it is not  here recalled. For it is a long tale, full of
deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke,  the sun rode  up
the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased.
Of N速menor he spoke, its glory  and its fall,  and the  return  of  the
Kings of Men to Middle-earth out  of the  deeps of  the Sea, borne  upon the
wings  of storm.  Then Elendil the  Tall and  his  mighty sons,  Isildur and
Anbrion, became great lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the
South-realm  in  Gondor above  the mouths  of  Anduin. But Sauron of  Mordor
assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance of  Elves  and  Men,  and the
hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor.
Thereupon  Elrond paused a  while  and  sighed.  `I  remember  well the
splendour  of  their banners,' he said.  `It recalled to me the glory of the
Elder  Days  and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and  captains
were  assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim  was
broken, and the  Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever,  and it was  not
so.'
`You  remember?'  said  Frodo,   speaking  his  thought  aloud  in  his
astonishment. `But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I
thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.'
'So  it was  indeed,' answered  Elrond gravely.  `But my memory reaches
back even  to the Elder Days. Edrendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin
before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter  of Dior, son of L速thien
of  Doriath.  I  have  seen  three ages in the West of the world,  and  many
defeats, and many fruitless victories.
`I  was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at the
Battle  of  Dagorlad before  the  Black Gate of  Mordor,  where  we had  the
mastery: for the Spear  of  Gil-galad and the  Sword of Elendil, Aiglos  and
Narsil, none could  withstand.  I beheld the  last  combat  on the slopes of
Orodruin, where Gil-galad  died, and  Elendil fell, and Narsil broke beneath
him; but Sauron himself  was overthrown, and Isildur  cut the Ring  from his
hand with the hilt-shard of his father's sword, and took it for his own.'
At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. `So that is what became of the
Ring!' he  cried. `If ever  such a  tale was told in the South, it  has long
been forgotten. I have  heard of  the Great Ring of him that we do not name;
but we believed  that it  perished from the world in the  ruin of  his first
realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.'
`Alas! yes,' said Elrond. `Isildur took it, as should not have been. It
should have  been cast then into Orodruin's fire nigh  at hand  where it was
made. But few marked what Isildur did.  He alone stood by his father in that
last mortal  contest; and by Gil-galad only Cnrdan stood, and I. But Isildur
would not listen to our counsel.
'  "This  I will have as weregild for  my father, and my  brother,"  he
said; and  therefore whether we would or no, he took  it to treasure it. But
soon he was betrayed by  it  to  his death; and so  it is named in the North
Isildur's Bane. Yet death  maybe  was  better  than  what  else  might  have
befallen him.
'Only to the North did  these tidings come, and  only  to a few.  Small
wonder  it is that you have not heard them,  Boromir. From the  ruin  of the
Gladden Fields,  where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back  over
the mountains  after long wandering. One of these was  Ohtar, the esquire of
Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them to
Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being  but a  child had remained  here in
Rivendell.  But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not
yet been forged again.
`Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last  Alliance? Not wholly so,
yet it  did not achieve  its  end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed.
His  Ring was  lost  but  not  unmade. The Dark  Tower  was broken,  but its
foundations were not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring,
and while it remains  they will endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men,
and
many  of  their  friends. had perished  in  the war. Anbrion  was slain, and
Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall
there  be  any  such  league  of  Elves  and  Men; for Men  multiply and the
Firstborn decrease, and the two  kindreds are estranged. And ever since that
day  the race  of N速menor has decayed,  and  the  span of  their  years  has
lessened.
'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the
Men  of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Ann速minas beside
Lake
Evendim fell  into ruin; and  the heirs  of Valandil  removed and  dwelt  at
Fornost on the high North Downs, and  that now too is desolate. Men call  it
Deadmen's  Dike,  and  they  fear  to  tread there.  For the  folk of  Arnor
