realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.'
`Alas! yes,' said Elrond. `Isildur took it, as should not have been. It
should have  been cast then into Orodruin's fire nigh  at hand  where it was
made. But few marked what Isildur did.  He alone stood by his father in that
last mortal  contest; and by Gil-galad only Cnrdan stood, and I. But Isildur
would not listen to our counsel.
'  "This  I will have as weregild for  my father, and my  brother,"  he
said; and  therefore whether we would or no, he took  it to treasure it. But
soon he was betrayed by  it  to  his death; and so  it is named in the North
Isildur's Bane. Yet death  maybe  was  better  than  what  else  might  have
befallen him.
'Only to the North did  these tidings come, and  only  to a few.  Small
wonder  it is that you have not heard them,  Boromir. From the  ruin  of the
Gladden Fields,  where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back  over
the mountains  after long wandering. One of these was  Ohtar, the esquire of
Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them to
Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being  but a  child had remained  here in
Rivendell.  But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not
yet been forged again.
`Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last  Alliance? Not wholly so,
yet it  did not achieve  its  end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed.
His  Ring was  lost  but  not  unmade. The Dark  Tower  was broken,  but its
foundations were not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring,
and while it remains  they will endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men,
and
many  of  their  friends. had perished  in  the war. Anbrion  was slain, and
Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall
there  be  any  such  league  of  Elves  and  Men; for Men  multiply and the
Firstborn decrease, and the two  kindreds are estranged. And ever since that
day  the race  of N®menor has decayed,  and  the  span of  their  years  has
lessened.
'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the
Men  of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Ann®minas beside
Lake
Evendim fell  into ruin; and  the heirs  of Valandil  removed and  dwelt  at
Fornost on the high North Downs, and  that now too is desolate. Men call  it
Deadmen's  Dike,  and  they  fear  to  tread there.  For the  folk of  Arnor
dwindled, and their  foes devoured them, and their lordship passed,  leaving
only green mounds in the grassy hills.
'In  the South  the  realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while  its
splendour grew, recalling  somewhat of the might  of N®menor,  ere it  fell.
High towers  that people built, and strong places. and havens of many ships;
and the  winged crown of the Kings of  Men was  held in awe by folk of  many
tongues. Their chief city was  Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars. through  the
midst of which  the River  flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower  of the
Rising  Moon,  eastward  upon  a shoulder of the  Mountains  of  Shadow; and
westward at the feet of the White  Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower  of
the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from the
seed of that tree which Isildur  brought over the  deep waters, and the seed
of that tree before came from Eressla, and before that  out of the Uttermost
West in the Day before days when the world was young.
`But  in the  wearing of the  swift years  of Middle-earth the line  of
Meneldil son of Anbrion failed, and the  Tree withered, and the blood of the
N®menoreans became  mingled with that of lesser men. Then the watch upon
the
walls of  Mordor slept, and  dark  things crept back to  Gorgoroth. And on a
time evil things came  forth, and they took Minas Ithil and abode in it, and
they made it into a place of dread; and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower
of Sorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of
Guard;
and these two cities  were ever at war, but Osgiliath  which lay between was
deserted and in its ruins shadows walked.
'So it has been  for many lives of men. But  the  Lords of Minas Tirith
still  fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage  of the River from
Argonath  to the  Sea.  And now that part of the tale that  I shall tell  is
drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of
all knowledge, and the  Three  were  released from  its dominion. But now in
this latter day they  are  in peril once more, for to our sorrow the One has
been  found. Others shall speak of its finding,  for  in that I played small
part.'
He ceased, but  at once Boromir  stood up, tall and proud, before them.
Give  me leave, Master  Elrond, said  he, first  to  say more of Gondor; for
verily from the land of Gondor I  am come. And  it would  be well for all to
know what passes there. For few,  I deem, know of  our deeds, and  therefore
guess little of their peril, if we should fail at last.
`Believe  not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N®menor is spent,
nor all its pride  and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild folk of the
East are still restrained,  and the terror of Morgul  kept at bay; and  thus
alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind  us,  bulwark  of
the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?
`Yet  that hour, maybe, is not now far away.  The  Nameless  Enemy  has
arisen again.  Smoke  rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount
Doom.
The power  of the Black  Land  grows and we are  hard beset. When the
Enemy
returned  our folk were driven from  Ithilien, our fair  domain east of  the
River, though we kept a  foothold there and  strength of arms. But this very
year,  in  the days of  June, sudden war came  upon us out of Mordor, and we
were swept away. We were  outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the
Easterlings  and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by numbers that we  were
defeated. A power was there that we have not felt before.
`Some said  that it could be seen, like a great  black horseman, a dark
shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a  madness filled our foes, but fear
fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant
of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still  stood
amid the ruins of Osgiliath.
'I was in  the company  that  held the  bridge, until it was cast  down
behind us. Four  only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and
two
others. But still we  fight on, holding all  the  west shores of Anduin; and
those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much
praise but little help. Only from Rohan  now will any men ride to us when we
call.
`In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues
to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But  I  do not
seek allies in war. The  might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons,  it is
said. I come  to ask for counsel and  the  unravelling of hard words. For on
the  eve  of  the  sudden assault a dream came to  my brother in a  troubled
sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me.
'In that  dream I  thought the  eastern sky grew dark  and there  was a
growing thunder, but  in  the  West a pale light lingered, and out of  it  I
