guess little of their peril, if we should fail at last.
`Believe  not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N®menor is spent,
nor all its pride  and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild folk of the
East are still restrained,  and the terror of Morgul  kept at bay; and  thus
alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind  us,  bulwark  of
the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?
`Yet  that hour, maybe, is not now far away.  The  Nameless  Enemy  has
arisen again.  Smoke  rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount
Doom.
The power  of the Black  Land  grows and we are  hard beset. When the
Enemy
returned  our folk were driven from  Ithilien, our fair  domain east of  the
River, though we kept a  foothold there and  strength of arms. But this very
year,  in  the days of  June, sudden war came  upon us out of Mordor, and we
were swept away. We were  outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the
Easterlings  and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by numbers that we  were
defeated. A power was there that we have not felt before.
`Some said  that it could be seen, like a great  black horseman, a dark
shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a  madness filled our foes, but fear
fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant
of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still  stood
amid the ruins of Osgiliath.
'I was in  the company  that  held the  bridge, until it was cast  down
behind us. Four  only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and
two
others. But still we  fight on, holding all  the  west shores of Anduin; and
those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much
praise but little help. Only from Rohan  now will any men ride to us when we
call.
`In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues
to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But  I  do not
seek allies in war. The  might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons,  it is
said. I come  to ask for counsel and  the  unravelling of hard words. For on
the  eve  of  the  sudden assault a dream came to  my brother in a  troubled
sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me.
'In that  dream I  thought the  eastern sky grew dark  and there  was a
growing thunder, but  in  the  West a pale light lingered, and out of  it  I
heard a voice, remote but clear, crying:
Seek for the Sword that was broken:
In Imladris it dwells;
There shall be counsels taken
Stronger than Morgul-spells.
There shall be shown a token
That Doom is near at hand,
For Isildur's Bane shall waken,
And the Halfling forth shall stand.
Of these words we could understand little, and we  spoke to our father,
Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of  Gondor. This only would
he say, that Imladris was  of old the name among the Elves of a far northern
dale, where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, greatest  of lore-masters. Therefore
my  brother, seeing how desperate  was our need, was eager to heed the dream
and seek for  Imladris; but since the  way was full  of doubt and  danger, I
took the journey upon  myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long
have I  wandered  by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, of  which
many had heard, but few knew where it lay.'
'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you'  said
Aragorn,  standing up. He cast  his sword upon the  table  that stood before
Elrond,  and  the blade  was in  two  pieces.  `Here  is  the Sword that was
Broken!' he said.
`And  who  are you, and what have  you to do with  Minas Tirith?' asked
Boromir,  looking  in  wonder  at  the  lean face  of  the  Ranger  and  his
weather-stained cloak.
`He is Aragorn  son of Arathorn,'  said Elrond;  `and  he is  descended
through many fathers from Isildur Elendil's son of  Minas  Ithil. He  is the
Chief of the D®nedain in the North, and few are now left of that folk.'
`Then  it  belongs to  you,  and not to  me  at all!'  cried  Frodo  in
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected  the Ring to be demanded
at once.
'It does not belong  to either of us,'  said Aragorn; `but it has  been
ordained that you should hold it for a while.'
'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly. `The time has come.
Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.'
There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken  by
a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to  reveal the Ring,
and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and
flickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand.
'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond.
Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. `The Halfling!'
he  muttered.  `Is then the  doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then
should we seek a broken sword?'
'The words were not       the  doom of Minas Tirith        ,' said Aragorn. `But doom
and great  deeds are indeed at hand.  For the  Sword that  was Broken is the
Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when  he fell. It has been treasured
by  his  heirs when all other heirlooms  were lost; for it was spoken of old
among  us that it should be made  again when the  Ring, Isildur's  Bane, was
found. Now you have seen the sword that you have sought, what would you
ask?
Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?'
`I was  not  sent to beg  any boon, but to  seek only the meaning  of a
riddle,' answered Boromir proudly. `Yet we are hard  pressed, and  the Sword
of  Elendil would be a help beyond  our hope-if  such a  thing could  indeed
return out of  the  shadows  of  the past.' He looked again  at Aragorn, and
doubt was in his eyes.
Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out:
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a fire shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken:
The crownless again shall be king.
`Not very good perhaps, but to the point -- if you need more beyond the
word  of Elrond. If that  was worth a journey of a hundred  and ten days  to
hear, you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort.
`I  made  that  up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, `for the  D®nadan, a
long  time  ago when  he first told me about  himself. I almost wish that my
adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.'
Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. `For my part  I
