and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and
flickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand.
'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond.
Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. `The Halfling!'
he  muttered.  `Is then the  doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then
should we seek a broken sword?'
'The words were not       the  doom of Minas Tirith        ,' said Aragorn. `But doom
and great  deeds are indeed at hand.  For the  Sword that  was Broken is the
Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when  he fell. It has been treasured
by  his  heirs when all other heirlooms  were lost; for it was spoken of old
among  us that it should be made  again when the  Ring, Isildur's  Bane, was
found. Now you have seen the sword that you have sought, what would you
ask?
Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?'
`I was  not  sent to beg  any boon, but to  seek only the meaning  of a
riddle,' answered Boromir proudly. `Yet we are hard  pressed, and  the Sword
of  Elendil would be a help beyond  our hope-if  such a  thing could  indeed
return out of  the  shadows  of  the past.' He looked again  at Aragorn, and
doubt was in his eyes.
Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out:
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a fire shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken:
The crownless again shall be king.
`Not very good perhaps, but to the point -- if you need more beyond the
word  of Elrond. If that  was worth a journey of a hundred  and ten days  to
hear, you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort.
`I  made  that  up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, `for the  D®nadan, a
long  time  ago when  he first told me about  himself. I almost wish that my
adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.'
Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. `For my part  I
forgive your doubt,'  he said. 'Little do I resemble the figures  of Elendil
and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in  the halls of Denethor.
I  am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I  have had  a hard life
and a long; and  the  leagues that lie between here and  Gondor are a  small
part  in the count of my journeys.  I have crossed many mountains  and  many
rivers, and trodden  many  plains, even  into the far  countries of Rhyn and
Harad where the stars are strange.
'But my home, such  as I have, is in the  North. For  here the heirs of
Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many
generations.  Our days have darkened,  and  we  have dwindled; but ever  the
Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, ere I
end.  Lonely  men are we, Rangers of  the wild, hunters--but hunters ever of
the servants  of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor
only.
`If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we  have played another
part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords do
not  stay. You  know  little  of the  lands beyond  your  bounds.  Peace and
freedom, do you say? The North would have known them little but for us. Fear
would  have destroyed them.  But when dark  things come  from the  houseless
hills, or creep from sunless  woods,  they fly from us. What roads would any
dare to tread, what safety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of
simple men at night, if the D®nedain were asleep, or were all gone into  the
grave?
`And yet less  thanks  have  we than you. Travellers  scowl at  us, and
countrymen give us  scornful names. "Strider"  I am to one fat man who lives
within a day's march  of foes that would  freeze his heart or lay his little
town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would  not have  it
otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple  they will be,
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred,
while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown.
`But now  the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur's
Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword  shall be reforged. I  will come
to Minas Tirith.'
`Isildur's Bane is found, you say,' said Boromir. `I have seen a bright
ring in the Halfling's hand; but Isildur perished ere this  age of the world
began, they say. How do  the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has it
passed  down  the  years,  until  it  is  brought  hither  by so  strange  a
messenger?'
`That shall be told,' said Elrond.
`But not  yet, I beg, Master!' said Bilbo. `Already the Sun is climbing
to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.'
`I  had  not named you,' said Elrond  smiling. `But I do so now.  Come!
Tell us your tale. And if you have  not yet cast your story  into verse, you
may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.'
`Very well,' said Bilbo. `I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the
true story, and  if some here have heard  me tell it otherwise' -- he looked
sidelong at Gluin -- `I ask them to forget it  and forgive me. I only wished
to claim the treasure  as my very own  in those days, and to be rid  of  the
name of thief that was put on me. But  perhaps I understand things a  little
better now. Anyway, this is what happened.'
To  some there  Bilbo's tale was  wholly  new, and they  listened  with
amazement while  the old  hobbit, actually not  at all displeased, recounted
his  adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle.
He would have given also  an account of his party and disappearance from the
Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand.
'Well told, my friend,' he said, `but that  is enough at this time. For
the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Let
him now speak!'
Then, less willingly  than Bilbo, Frodo  told of all his  dealings with
the  Ring from the day that  it passed  into his keeping. Every step  of his
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford  of Bruinen was questioned and considered,
and  everything  that  he  could  recall  concerning  the  Black Riders  was
examined. At last he sat down again.
`Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. `You  would have made a good story of it,
if they hadn't kept  on interrupting. I tried to  make  a few notes,  but we
shall have to  go  over it all again together some time, if I am to write it
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'
`Yes, it made quite a long tale,' answered Frodo. 'But  the story still
does not seem complete to  me.  I still want to know a good deal, especially
about Gandalf.'
Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. `You speak for me
also,'  he cried, and  turning  to  Elrond he  said: `The Wise may have good
reason to believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long
debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not
