messenger?'
`That shall be told,' said Elrond.
`But not  yet, I beg, Master!' said Bilbo. `Already the Sun is climbing
to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.'
`I  had  not named you,' said Elrond  smiling. `But I do so now.  Come!
Tell us your tale. And if you have  not yet cast your story  into verse, you
may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.'
`Very well,' said Bilbo. `I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the
true story, and  if some here have heard  me tell it otherwise' -- he looked
sidelong at Gluin -- `I ask them to forget it  and forgive me. I only wished
to claim the treasure  as my very own  in those days, and to be rid  of  the
name of thief that was put on me. But  perhaps I understand things a  little
better now. Anyway, this is what happened.'
To  some there  Bilbo's tale was  wholly  new, and they  listened  with
amazement while  the old  hobbit, actually not  at all displeased, recounted
his  adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle.
He would have given also  an account of his party and disappearance from the
Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand.
'Well told, my friend,' he said, `but that  is enough at this time. For
the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Let
him now speak!'
Then, less willingly  than Bilbo, Frodo  told of all his  dealings with
the  Ring from the day that  it passed  into his keeping. Every step  of his
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford  of Bruinen was questioned and considered,
and  everything  that  he  could  recall  concerning  the  Black Riders  was
examined. At last he sat down again.
`Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. `You  would have made a good story of it,
if they hadn't kept  on interrupting. I tried to  make  a few notes,  but we
shall have to  go  over it all again together some time, if I am to write it
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'
`Yes, it made quite a long tale,' answered Frodo. 'But  the story still
does not seem complete to  me.  I still want to know a good deal, especially
about Gandalf.'
Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. `You speak for me
also,'  he cried, and  turning  to  Elrond he  said: `The Wise may have good
reason to believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long
debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not
hear  the proofs? And I would ask this  also. What of Saruman? He is learned
in  the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he
knows the things that we have heard?'
`The  questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond.
`I had not  overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it
is the part of Gandalf to make clear;  and I call upon  him last, for it  is
the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.'
`Some,  Galdor,'  said Gandalf, `would think the tidings of Gluin,  and
the pursuit of  Frodo,  proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of
great worth to  the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the  Nazgyl
keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed.' At this Gluin stirred, but  did not
speak. `The Three we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much?
'There  is indeed  a  wide  waste of time  between  the River  and  the
Mountain, between the loss and the finding. But  the gap in the knowledge of
the Wise  has been  filled at  last. Yet too slowly. For  the Enemy has been
close  behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that not until this
year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth.
'Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass the
doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur,  and secretly explored his ways, and
found thus that our fears  were  true:  he was none other than  Sauron,  our
Enemy of  old, at  length  taking shape  and power  again.  Some,  too, will
remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against him, and
for
long we watched him only.  Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded,
and the Council put forth its strength  and  drove  the evil out of Mirkwood
and that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring: a strange chance,
if chance it was.
`But we were  too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron  also had watched us,
and had long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from afar through
Minas Morgul, where his Nine servants dwelt, until  all  was  ready. Then he
gave way before us,  but  only feigned to flee,  and soon  after came to the
Dark Tower and openly declared  himself. Then for the  last time the Council
met; for now we learned that  he was seeking ever more eagerly for the  One.
We feared then that  he had some news  of it  that we knew  nothing  of. But
Saruman said nay, and repeated what  he had  said to us before: that the One
would never again be found in Middle-earth.
`  "At  the worst,"  said he, "our Enemy knows that we have  it not and
that it still is  lost. But what was lost may yet be  found, he thinks. Fear
not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into
Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago,  while  Sauron slept, it  was rolled
down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End."'
Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of
the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long
lain hidden. He sighed.
`There  I was at fault,' he said. `I was lulled by the words of Saruman
the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril would
now be less.'
`We were all at  fault,' said Elrond, `and but  for your vigilance  the
Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!'
`From the first my heart misgave  me,  against all reason that I knew,'
said Gandalf, `and I desired  to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how
long he had possessed it. So I set a watch for  him, guessing that he  would
ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but
he escaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matter rest, watching
and waiting only, as we have too often done.
`Time passed  with many cares, until my  doubts were awakened again  to
sudden  fear. Whence  came the hobbit's  ring?  What,  if my  fear was true,
should be  done with it? Those  things I must decide. But I spoke yet of  my
dread to none, knowing the peril of an  untimely whisper, if it went astray.
In all the long wars with  the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest
foe.
'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware  that  spies of many
sorts, even  beasts and birds,  were gathered round the Shire, and  my  fear
grew.  I called  for the help of the D®nedain, and their watch  was doubled;
and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.'
`And I,' said Aragorn, `counselled that we should hunt  for Gollum. too
late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's  heir should
labour to  repair  Isildur's fault, I went  with  Gandalf  on  the  long and
hopeless search.'
Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland,
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. `There we
had
rumour of him, and we guess  that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but
we never found him,  and  at last  I  despaired. And  then  in my despair  I
