that it still is  lost. But what was lost may yet be  found, he thinks. Fear
not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into
Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago,  while  Sauron slept, it  was rolled
down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End."'
Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of
the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long
lain hidden. He sighed.
`There  I was at fault,' he said. `I was lulled by the words of Saruman
the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril would
now be less.'
`We were all at  fault,' said Elrond, `and but  for your vigilance  the
Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!'
`From the first my heart misgave  me,  against all reason that I knew,'
said Gandalf, `and I desired  to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how
long he had possessed it. So I set a watch for  him, guessing that he  would
ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but
he escaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matter rest, watching
and waiting only, as we have too often done.
`Time passed  with many cares, until my  doubts were awakened again  to
sudden  fear. Whence  came the hobbit's  ring?  What,  if my  fear was true,
should be  done with it? Those  things I must decide. But I spoke yet of  my
dread to none, knowing the peril of an  untimely whisper, if it went astray.
In all the long wars with  the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest
foe.
'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware  that  spies of many
sorts, even  beasts and birds,  were gathered round the Shire, and  my  fear
grew.  I called  for the help of the D®nedain, and their watch  was doubled;
and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.'
`And I,' said Aragorn, `counselled that we should hunt  for Gollum. too
late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's  heir should
labour to  repair  Isildur's fault, I went  with  Gandalf  on  the  long and
hopeless search.'
Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland,
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. `There we
had
rumour of him, and we guess  that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but
we never found him,  and  at last  I  despaired. And  then  in my despair  I
thought again of a test that might make the finding of  Gollum unneeded. The
ring  itself  might  tell if it were the One.  The memory  of  words  at the
Council came back to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time.  I heard
them now clearly in my heart.
` "The Nine, the Seven, and the Three," he said, "had each their proper
gem. Not so the  One.  It  was round  and  unadorned,  as it were one of the
lesser rings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could
still see and read."
`What those  marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The
maker.
And Saruman? But great though his lore may be,  it  must have a source. What
hand  save Sauron's ever  held this  thing, ere  it was  lost?  The hand  of
Isildur alone.
`With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly  to Gondor.
In former days the members  of my order  had been  well received  there, but
Saruman most of all. Often he had  been for long  the  guest of the Lords of
the  City. Less welcome  did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, and
grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.
' "If indeed you look only, as  you  say, for records of  ancient days,
and the beginnings of the City,  read on! " he said.  "For to me what was is
less dark than what is to come, and that  is  my care.  But unless you  have
more  skill even  than Saruman,  who has  studied here  long, you  will find
naught that  is not  well known to  me, who am  master of  the lore of  this
City."
`So said Denethor.  And yet  there lie in his  hoards many records that
few  now can read,  even of  the lore-masters, for their scripts and tongues
have become dark  to later  men.  And  Boromir, there lies in  Minas  Tirith
still, unread, I  guess,  by  any save Saruman  and  myself since the  kings
failed, a scroll  that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not  march away
straight from the war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.'
'Some in the North, maybe,' Boromir broke in.  'All know in Gondor that
he went  first  to Minas Anor and  dwelt a while  with his nephew  Meneldil,
instructing him,  before he committed to him the  rule of the South Kingdom.
In  that time he planted there the last sapling of  the White Tree in memory
of his brother.'
`But in that time also he made this scroll,' said Gandalf; `and that is
not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns  the Ring,
and thus wrote Isildur therein:
The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but
records  of  it  shall  be left  in  Gondor,  where also dwell the  heirs of
Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these great  matters shall grow
dim.
`And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it.
It  was  hot  when  I first took it, hot as  a glede,  and my  hand was
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain  of  it.
Yet even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth
neither  its  beauty nor its  shape. Already the  writing  upon it, which at
first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now  only barely to be  read.
It is fashioned in  an elven-script of  Eregion, for they have no letters in
Mordor for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to
be  a tongue of the Black Land, since  it  is foul and uncouth. What evil it
saith I do  not  know; but I trace here a copy  of it,  lest it fade  beyond
recall. The Ring misseth,  maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black
and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the
gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. gut  for my part I will
risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair. It  is
precious to me, though I buy it with great pain.
'When  I read these words, my quest was  ended. For  the traced writing
was indeed as Isildur  guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and  the servants of
the Tower. And what was said therein was already  known. For in the day that
Sauron first put on  the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the  Three, was aware of
him, and from afar he  heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes
were revealed.
`At once  I took my leave of  Denethor, but even as  I went northwards,
messages came to me out of Lurien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that
he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went  first to meet him
and hear his tale.  Into what deadly  perils  he had  gone alone I dared not
guess.'
`There is little need  to tell  of them,' said Aragorn. `If a  man must
needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul
Vale, then  perils he will have. I, too, despaired at  last,  and I began my
homeward  journey.  And then, by fortune, I  came suddenly on what I sought:
the marks of soft feet beside  a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and
swift, and it  led  not to Mordor but  away. Along  the  skirts  of the Dead
