and thus wrote Isildur therein:
The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but
records  of  it  shall  be left  in  Gondor,  where also dwell the  heirs of
Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these great  matters shall grow
dim.
`And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it.
It  was  hot  when  I first took it, hot as  a glede,  and my  hand was
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain  of  it.
Yet even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth
neither  its  beauty nor its  shape. Already the  writing  upon it, which at
first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now  only barely to be  read.
It is fashioned in  an elven-script of  Eregion, for they have no letters in
Mordor for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to
be  a tongue of the Black Land, since  it  is foul and uncouth. What evil it
saith I do  not  know; but I trace here a copy  of it,  lest it fade  beyond
recall. The Ring misseth,  maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black
and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the
gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. gut  for my part I will
risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair. It  is
precious to me, though I buy it with great pain.
'When  I read these words, my quest was  ended. For  the traced writing
was indeed as Isildur  guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and  the servants of
the Tower. And what was said therein was already  known. For in the day that
Sauron first put on  the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the  Three, was aware of
him, and from afar he  heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes
were revealed.
`At once  I took my leave of  Denethor, but even as  I went northwards,
messages came to me out of Lurien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that
he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went  first to meet him
and hear his tale.  Into what deadly  perils  he had  gone alone I dared not
guess.'
`There is little need  to tell  of them,' said Aragorn. `If a  man must
needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul
Vale, then  perils he will have. I, too, despaired at  last,  and I began my
homeward  journey.  And then, by fortune, I  came suddenly on what I sought:
the marks of soft feet beside  a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and
swift, and it  led  not to Mordor but  away. Along  the  skirts  of the Dead
Marshes  I followed  it,  and  then I had him.  Lurking by a  stagnant mere,
peering in  the water as the dark  eve  fell, I  caught  him, Gollum. He was
covered  with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and
I  was not gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks
of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of  all  my journey, the road back,
watching him day and night, making him walk before  me with a halter  on his
neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever
towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at last and gave him to the Elves, for
we had agreed that this should  be  done; and I was  glad to  be  rid of his
company, for he  stank. For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but
Gandalf came and endured long speech with him.'
`Yes,  long  and weary,' said Gandalf, `but not without profit. For one
thing, the  tale  he told of his loss agreed  with  that which Bilbo has now
told openly  for  the  first time; but  that mattered little,  since  I  had
already guessed it. But I  learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of
the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also  that he  had
possessed  it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring  had
lengthened his  years far beyond their span;  but that power only  the Great
Rings wield.
`And if that is  not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test that
I spoke of. Upon this very ring  which you have here seen  held aloft, round
and unadorned, the  letters that Isildur reported may  still be read, if one
has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I
have done, and this I have read:
Ash  nazg durbatulyk, ush  nazg  gimbatul,  ash  nazg  thrakatulyk  agh
burzum-ishi krimpatul.'
The change in  the wizard's voice  was  astounding. Suddenly it  became
menacing,  powerful, harsh as stone.  A  shadow seemed to pass over the high
sun,  and  the porch for  a moment grew  dark. All trembled,  and the  Elves
stopped their ears.
`Never before has any voice dared to utter the  words of that tongue in
Imladris,  Gandalf  the Grey,'  said  Elrond, as  the shadow passed  and the
company breathed once more.
`And let us  hope that none  will  ever speak it  here again,' answered
Gandalf. `Nonetheless I do not ask  your  pardon, Master Elrond. For if that
tongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West, then let all put
doubt aside  that  this thing is  indeed what the Wise  have  declared:  the
treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice;  and  in it lies a great
part of his strength  of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the
Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed:
One Ring to  rule them all,  One  Ring to find  them, One Ring to bring
them all and in the Darkness bind them.
`Know  also, my  friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum.  He  was
loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it  is beyond all doubt  that he
went to Mordor, and  there all  that  he knew was forced from him. Thus  the
Enemy knows now that the  One is found,  that it was  long in the Shire; and
since his servants have pursued it  almost to our  door, he  soon will know,
already he may know, even as I speak, that we have it here.'
All sat silent for a  while,  until  at length Boromir  spoke. `He is a
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became
of him? To what doom did you put him?'
'He is in prison, but no worse,' said  Aragorn.  `He had suffered much.
There is no doubt that he  was tormented, and the fear of Sauron  lies black
on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful
Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to be
believed in one so lean and withered.  He could work much mischief still, if
he were free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some
evil errand.'
`Alas!  alas!' cried Legolas,  and in  his  fair  elvish face there was
great distress. `The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They
are not  good, but only  here have I learned  how evil they may seem to this
company. Smjagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.'
'Escaped?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue it
bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?'
`Not through lack of  watchfulness,' said Legolas; `but perhaps through
over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and that
more is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature day
and  night, at Gandalf's  bidding,  much  though we wearied of the task. But
Gandalf  bade us  hope still for his cure, and we had not the  heart to keep
him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall  back into his old
black thoughts.'
'You were less tender  to me,'  said Gluin with  a flash of his eyes as
old memories were stirred  of  his imprisonment in  the  deep places of  the
Elven-king's halls.
