treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice;  and  in it lies a great
part of his strength  of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the
Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed:
One Ring to  rule them all,  One  Ring to find  them, One Ring to bring
them all and in the Darkness bind them.
`Know  also, my  friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum.  He  was
loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it  is beyond all doubt  that he
went to Mordor, and  there all  that  he knew was forced from him. Thus  the
Enemy knows now that the  One is found,  that it was  long in the Shire; and
since his servants have pursued it  almost to our  door, he  soon will know,
already he may know, even as I speak, that we have it here.'
All sat silent for a  while,  until  at length Boromir  spoke. `He is a
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became
of him? To what doom did you put him?'
'He is in prison, but no worse,' said  Aragorn.  `He had suffered much.
There is no doubt that he  was tormented, and the fear of Sauron  lies black
on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful
Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to be
believed in one so lean and withered.  He could work much mischief still, if
he were free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some
evil errand.'
`Alas!  alas!' cried Legolas,  and in  his  fair  elvish face there was
great distress. `The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They
are not  good, but only  here have I learned  how evil they may seem to this
company. Smjagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.'
'Escaped?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue it
bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?'
`Not through lack of  watchfulness,' said Legolas; `but perhaps through
over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and that
more is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature day
and  night, at Gandalf's  bidding,  much  though we wearied of the task. But
Gandalf  bade us  hope still for his cure, and we had not the  heart to keep
him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall  back into his old
black thoughts.'
'You were less tender  to me,'  said Gluin with  a flash of his eyes as
old memories were stirred  of  his imprisonment in  the  deep places of  the
Elven-king's halls.
'Now  come!' said Gandalf. `Pray do not interrupt, my good Gluin.  That
was  a regrettable misunderstanding,  long set right. If  all the grievances
that stand between Elves and  Dwarves are to  be brought up  here, we may as
well abandon this Council.'
Gluin  rose and bowed, and Legolas  continued.  'In  the days  of  fair
weather we led Gollum through the  woods; and there was a high tree standing
alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up
to the highest branches, until he felt the free  wind; but we set a guard at
the tree's foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind
to climb  after him: he had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with his
feet as well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night.
'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Orcs
came  on us at unawares. We drove them off after  some time;  they were many
and  fierce, but they came from over  the mountains, and were unused  to the
woods. When the battle was  over, we  found  that Gollum was  gone, and  his
guards were slain  or taken. It then seemed plain to  us that the attack had
been made for his rescue, and that he knew  of  it beforehand. How that  was
contrived we cannot guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy
are many. The dark things that were driven  out in  the year of the Dragon's
fall have returned in greater  numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil place,
save where our realm is maintained.
`We have failed to  recapture Gollum.  We came on his trail among those
of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into the Forest, going south. But ere long
it escaped our  skill,  and  we  dared not  continue the hunt;  for we  were
drawing nigh to Dol Guldur,  and that  is still a very evil place; we do not
go that way.'
`Well,  well, he  is gone,' said Gandalf. 'We have no time  to seek for
him again.  He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither
he nor Sauron have foreseen.
'And now  I will answer Galdor's other questions. What of Saruman? What
are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must tell in full, for only
Elrond  has heard it yet, and that in brief, but it will bear on all that we
must  resolve. It is the last  chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it
has yet gone.
'At the  end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was  on
my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land; for I  had a
foreboding  of some danger, still hidden  from  me but  drawing  near. There
messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard
of the Black Shadow  a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing  save a few
fugitives  from  the South;  yet  it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of
which they would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along
the Greenway; and  not  far from Bree  I came upon  a traveller sitting on a
bank beside the road with his grazing  horse beside him. It was Radagast the
Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel,  near the borders of Mirkwood.
He
is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year.
` "Gandalf! " he cried.  "I was seeking you. But I  am  a  stranger  in
these parts. All I knew was that  you might  be found  in a wild region with
the uncouth name of Shire."
' "Your information was  correct," I said. "But do not put it that way,
if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the  borders of  the  Shire
now.  And what do you want with me?  It must  be pressing.  You were never a
traveller, unless driven by great need."
' "I have an urgent errand," he said. "My news is evil." Then he looked
about him, as if  the hedges  might have ears. "Nazgyl,"  he whispered. "The
Nine are abroad again. They  have  crossed the River secretly and are moving
westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black."
'I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it.
` "The enemy must have some great need or purpose," said Radagast; "but
what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot
guess."
` "What do you mean? " said I.
` "I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news  of a
land called Shire."
' " The  Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the  Wise might fear
to  withstand the  Nine,  when they  are gathered together under  their fell
chieftain. A great  king and sorcerer he was  of  old,  and now  he wields a
deadly fear. "Who told you, and who sent you? " I asked.
' "Saruman the White,"  answered Radagast. "And  he told me to say that
if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it
will be too late."
'And  that  message  brought  me  hope.  For Saruman the  White is  the
greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a  worthy  Wizard, a master of
shapes and changes  of hue;  and he has much  lore of herbs  and beasts, and
