messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard
of the Black Shadow  a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing  save a few
fugitives  from  the South;  yet  it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of
which they would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along
the Greenway; and  not  far from Bree  I came upon  a traveller sitting on a
bank beside the road with his grazing  horse beside him. It was Radagast the
Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel,  near the borders of Mirkwood.
He
is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year.
` "Gandalf! " he cried.  "I was seeking you. But I  am  a  stranger  in
these parts. All I knew was that  you might  be found  in a wild region with
the uncouth name of Shire."
' "Your information was  correct," I said. "But do not put it that way,
if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the  borders of  the  Shire
now.  And what do you want with me?  It must  be pressing.  You were never a
traveller, unless driven by great need."
' "I have an urgent errand," he said. "My news is evil." Then he looked
about him, as if  the hedges  might have ears. "Nazgyl,"  he whispered. "The
Nine are abroad again. They  have  crossed the River secretly and are moving
westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black."
'I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it.
` "The enemy must have some great need or purpose," said Radagast; "but
what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot
guess."
` "What do you mean? " said I.
` "I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news  of a
land called Shire."
' " The  Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the  Wise might fear
to  withstand the  Nine,  when they  are gathered together under  their fell
chieftain. A great  king and sorcerer he was  of  old,  and now  he wields a
deadly fear. "Who told you, and who sent you? " I asked.
' "Saruman the White,"  answered Radagast. "And  he told me to say that
if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it
will be too late."
'And  that  message  brought  me  hope.  For Saruman the  White is  the
greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a  worthy  Wizard, a master of
shapes and changes  of hue;  and he has much  lore of herbs  and beasts, and
birds are especially  his friends. But Saruman  has long studied the arts of
the Enemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestall him. It was
by the devices of Saruman  that we drove him  from Dol  Guldur. It might  be
that he had found some weapons that would drive back the Nine.
' "I will go to Saruman," I said.
' "Then  you must go       now   ," said  Radagast; "for I have  wasted time in
looking  for you,  and  the  days  are running short. I was told to find you
before Midsummer, and that is now  here. Even if you set out from this spot,
you will hardly  reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek.
I myself  shall turn back at  once." And with that he mounted and would have
ridden straight off.
` "Stay a  moment! " I said. "We shall  need your help, and the help of
all things that will give it. Send out messages  to all the beasts and birds
that are  your friends.  Tell them to bring news  of anything that bears  on
this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc."
`  "I will do  that,"  he said, and rode off  as if the Nine were after
him.
`I could not follow him then and  there. I had ridden  very far already
that day, and I was as weary as my horse;  and I needed to consider matters.
I stayed the  night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to the
Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake!
`However,  I wrote a message  to Frodo,  and trusted  to  my friend the
innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last to
the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard,  in the  end  of the
Misty  Mountains,  not far  from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you
that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the
northmost  foothills  of Ered  Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But
Isengard is a  circle of  sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with  a wall,
and in the midst of that valley is a tower of  stone called Orthanc.  It was
not made by Saruman, but by the Men of N®menor long ago; and it is very tall
and has many secrets; yet  it looks not to be  a work of craft. It cannot be
reached save  by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is
only one gate.
'Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch  in the wall of
rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keepers of the  gate  were on the
watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, and
the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though I knew
no reason for it.
'But  I rode to the foot of Orthanc,  and came to the stair  of Saruman
and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his
finger.
`  "So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in  his eyes
there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart.
` "Yes, I have come," I said. "I have  come  for your  aid, Saruman the
White." And that title seemed to anger him.
'  "Have  you indeed, Gandalf the         Grey   ! " he scoffed.  "For aid? It has
seldom been  heard of that  Gandalf the Grey sought for  aid, one so cunning
and  so wise, wandering about  the lands,  and concerning  himself in  every
business, whether it belongs to him or not."
'I looked  at him and wondered.  "But if I am  not deceived,"  said  I,
"things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength."
' "That may be so," he said, "but the thought is late in coming to you.
How long. I wonder, have  you concealed  from me, the head of the Council, a
matter  of greatest  import? What brings you now from your lurking-place  in
the Shire? "
' "The Nine have come forth again," I answered. "They have crossed  the
River. So Radagast said to me."
` "Radagast  the Brown! " laughed  Saruman, and  he no longer concealed
his scorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool!
Yet he had just the wit to play the part  that I set him. For you have come,
and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay,  Gandalf
the Grey,  and rest  from  journeys.  For  I  am  Saruman the Wise,  Saruman
Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! "
'I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not
so, but  were woven of  all  colours.  and  if  he moved they shimmered  and
changed hue so that the eye was bewildered.
' "I liked white better," I said.
' "White! "  he sneered. "It serves as a beginning. White  cloth may be
dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken."
' "In which case it is  no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks a
thing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom."
'  "You need  not  speak to me as to one of the fools that you take for
friends," said he. "I have not brought  you hither  to be instructed by you,
but to give you a choice."
