no reason for it.
'But  I rode to the foot of Orthanc,  and came to the stair  of Saruman
and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his
finger.
`  "So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in  his eyes
there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart.
` "Yes, I have come," I said. "I have  come  for your  aid, Saruman the
White." And that title seemed to anger him.
'  "Have  you indeed, Gandalf the         Grey   ! " he scoffed.  "For aid? It has
seldom been  heard of that  Gandalf the Grey sought for  aid, one so cunning
and  so wise, wandering about  the lands,  and concerning  himself in  every
business, whether it belongs to him or not."
'I looked  at him and wondered.  "But if I am  not deceived,"  said  I,
"things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength."
' "That may be so," he said, "but the thought is late in coming to you.
How long. I wonder, have  you concealed  from me, the head of the Council, a
matter  of greatest  import? What brings you now from your lurking-place  in
the Shire? "
' "The Nine have come forth again," I answered. "They have crossed  the
River. So Radagast said to me."
` "Radagast  the Brown! " laughed  Saruman, and  he no longer concealed
his scorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool!
Yet he had just the wit to play the part  that I set him. For you have come,
and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay,  Gandalf
the Grey,  and rest  from  journeys.  For  I  am  Saruman the Wise,  Saruman
Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! "
'I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not
so, but  were woven of  all  colours.  and  if  he moved they shimmered  and
changed hue so that the eye was bewildered.
' "I liked white better," I said.
' "White! "  he sneered. "It serves as a beginning. White  cloth may be
dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken."
' "In which case it is  no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks a
thing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom."
'  "You need  not  speak to me as to one of the fools that you take for
friends," said he. "I have not brought  you hither  to be instructed by you,
but to give you a choice."
'He  drew  himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were making a
speech  long  rehearsed.  "The Elder Days  are gone.  The  Middle  Days  are
passing. The Younger Days are  beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but
our time is at hand: the world of Men, which  we must rule. But we must have
power, power to order all things as  we  will, for that good  which only the
Wise can see.
'  "And listen, Gandalf,  my old friend and  helper! "  he said, coming
near and speaking now in a softer voice.  "I said we,  for we it may be,  if
you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old  allies and
policies will not avail us  at all. There is no hope left in Elves  or dying
N®menor. This then  is  one  choice before you. before us. We may join  with
that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf.  There is hope that way.  Its victory
is at hand; and  there will be rich reward for those that  aided it.  As the
Power grows, its proved friends will also  grow; and  the Wise, such  as you
and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses,  to control it.
We  can bide  our time, we can keep our  thoughts in our  hearts,  deploring
maybe  evils done by the way,  but  approving the high and ultimate purpose:
Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the  things that  we have so far striven in vain
to accomplish,  hindered rather than helped by  our weak  or  idle  friends.
There need not be, there would not be, any  real change in our designs, only
in our means."
' "Saruman," I said, "I  have  heard  speeches of this kind before, but
only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I
cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears."
'He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. "Well, I see
that this wise course  does  not commend itself to you,"  he said. "Not yet?
Not if some better way can be contrived? "
`He came and laid his long hand on my arm.  "And why not, Gandalf? " he
whispered. "Why not? The Ruling Ring? If  we could  command that,  then  the
Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought  you here. For I have
many eyes  in my service, and  I  believe that  you know where this precious
thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what
is your  business there? " As he said this a lust which he could not conceal
shone suddenly in his eyes.
' "Saruman," I  said, standing away from him, "only one hand at  a time
can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we!  But
I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now  that
I  learn  your  mind. You  were head of  the Council, but you have  unmasked
yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to  submit to  Sauron, or
to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to offer? "
'He was cold now and perilous. "Yes," he said. "I did not expect you to
show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the chance of aiding me
willingly. and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is
to stay here, until the end."
' "Until what end? "
' "Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find  means
to  persuade you. Or until  it is found in your despite, and  the Ruler  has
time to turn to lighter matters:  to devise, say,  a  fitting reward for the
hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey."
' "That  may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,"  said  I.  He
laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it.
`They took me and they set me alone  on the pinnacle of Orthanc, in the
place  where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars.  There is no descent
save  by a narrow stair of many  thousand steps, and  the valley below seems
far away. I looked  on it and saw that, whereas it  had once been  green and
fair, it was now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in
Isengard,  for Saruman was mustering a  great force  on his  own account, in
rivalry of Sauron  and  not  in his service yet. Over  all his works  a dark
smoke hung  and wrapped itself about the sides  of Orthanc. I stood alone on
an island  in the clouds; and I had  no  chance  of escape, and my days were
bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I  had but little room in which to pace
to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North.
`That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt  assured, apart from  the words
of Saruman which might  be  lies.  Long ere I came to  Isengard I had  heard
tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some  hope.  I hoped that Frodo had
set forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendell
before  the deadly pursuit  began. And  both  my  fear and  my  hope  proved
ill-founded. For my  hope  was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was
founded on the cunning of Sauron. But  fat men  who sell ale have many calls
to answer; and the power of  Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in
the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the
hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter  in  the  Shire far
away.'
