the hills and woods under the starlight.  Merry and Pippin suspected that he
visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done.
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of
good 'preservation':  outwardly he retained the appearance  of a  robust and
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. 'Some folk have all the luck,' they
said;  but it was not until Frodo approached the  usually more  sober age of
fifty that they began to think it queer.
Frodo himself, after the first shock, found  that being his  own master
and  the  Mr. Baggins of Bag End  was rather  pleasant. For some  years he was
quite  happy and did not  worry much about the  future. But half unknown  to
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was  steadily growing. He
found himself  wondering at times,  especially in the autumn, about the wild
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his
dreams. He began to say to himself: 'Perhaps I shall cross the  River myself
one day.' To which the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.'
So it  went on,  until his forties were  running  out, and his fiftieth
birthday  was  drawing  near:  fifty  was a number  that he felt was somehow
significant (or ominous); it was at any  rate at that age that adventure had
suddenly  befallen  Bilbo. Frodo began to feel  restless, and the  old paths
seemed too well-trodden. He  looked at maps, and  wondered  what lay  beyond
their edges: maps made  in the Shire showed  mostly  white spaces beyond its
borders.  He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking
and talking with the strange  wayfarers that began at this time to appear in
the Shire.
There were rumours of  strange things happening in the  world  outside;
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the
Shire, could  now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,
passing and  not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and  were  no
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road
in  unusual numbers. The ancient East-West Road ran through the Shire to its
end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their
mines in the Blue Mountains. They  were the  hobbits' chief  source of  news
from distant parts - if they  wanted any: as a rule  dwarves said little and
hobbits  asked  no  more.  But now Frodo  often met strange dwarves  of  far
countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in
whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor.
That name  the hobbits  only knew in legends  of the  dark past, like a
shadow  in  the  background  of their  memories;  but  it  was  ominous  and
disquieting. It seemed that the  evil power in Mirkwood had been  driven out
by the White Council  only  to  reappear  in  greater  strength  in the  old
strongholds of Mordor. The  Dark Tower had been rebuilt,  it was  said. From
there the  power was spreading far and  wide,  and away far  east  and south
there were  wars and  growing  fear.  Orcs were  multiplying  again  in  the
mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer dull-witted, but  cunning and armed
with  dreadful  weapons.  And there  were  murmured  hints of creatures more
terrible than all these, but they had no name.
Little of all this,  of  course, reached the ears of  ordinary hobbits.
But  even the deafest  and most stay-at-home began to hear queer  tales; and
those whose business  took  them  to  the  borders  saw strange  things. The
conversation in      The  Green Dragon         at Bywater,  one evening in the spring  of
Frodo's  fiftieth year,  showed that  even in the comfortable  heart of  the
Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them.
Sam Gamgee was sitting in one  corner near the fire,  and opposite  him
was Ted  Sandyman, the  miller's son;  and there  were various  other rustic
hobbits listening to their talk.
'Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,' said Sam.
'Ah,'  said  Ted, 'you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales
and children's stories at home, if I want to.'
'No doubt you can,' retorted Sam, 'and I daresay  there's more truth in
some of them than you reckon.  Who invented the stories anyway? Take
dragons
now.'
'No thank 'ee,' said  Ted, 'I won't.  I heard tell of them when I was a
youngster, but there's no  call to  believe in  them  now. There's  only one
Dragon in Bywater, and that's Green,' he said, getting a general laugh.
'All  right,' said  Sam, laughing with the rest. 'But  what about these
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call  them? They do say that one bigger
than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.'
'Who's  they  ?'
'My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up
to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He            saw   one.'
'Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal's always saying  he's seen  things; and
maybe he sees things that ain't there.'
'But  this  one was as big  as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven
yards to a stride, if it was an inch.'
'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw           was   an elm  tree, as like as
not.'
'But this one was      walking,   I tell you; and there  ain't no elm tree on
the North Moors.'
'Then Hal can't have  seen one,' said Ted. There  was some laughing and
clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point.
'All  the same,'  said  Sam,  'you can't deny  that others besides  our
Halfast have seen  queer  folk crossing the  Shire - crossing  it, mind you:
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders  have never
been so busy before.
'And I've heard tell  that Elves are moving west. They do  say they are
going to the harbours, out away beyond the  White Towers.' Sam waved his
arm
vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the
old towers  beyond  the western borders  of the  Shire. But  it was  an  old
tradition that  away over  there stood the Grey  Havens, from which at times
elven-ships set sail, never to return.
'They are sailing,  sailing, sailing over the Sea,  they are going into
the West  and  leaving us,' said  Sam, half chanting the words, shaking  his
head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.
'Well,  that isn't anything  new, if you believe the  old tales.  And I
don't see  what it matters to me or you.  Let  them sail!  But I warrant you
haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.'
'Well I don't  know,' said Sam  thoughtfully. He believed he  had  once
seen an Elf in the  woods, and still hoped to  see more one  day. Of all the
legends  that he had heard in his  early  years such fragments of tales  and
half-remembered  stories  about  the Elves as the hobbits knew,  had  always
moved him  most deeply. 'There  are some,  even in these parts, as  know the
Fair Folk and get news  of them,'  he said. 'There's Mr. Baggins now, that I
work for. He told me  that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more:  many's the  talk I had with  him  when I was a
little lad.'
'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked,
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where  you get your news from, you'll  never
