I  learn  your  mind. You  were head of  the Council, but you have  unmasked
yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to  submit to  Sauron, or
to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to offer? "
'He was cold now and perilous. "Yes," he said. "I did not expect you to
show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the chance of aiding me
willingly. and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is
to stay here, until the end."
' "Until what end? "
' "Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find  means
to  persuade you. Or until  it is found in your despite, and  the Ruler  has
time to turn to lighter matters:  to devise, say,  a  fitting reward for the
hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey."
' "That  may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,"  said  I.  He
laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it.
`They took me and they set me alone  on the pinnacle of Orthanc, in the
place  where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars.  There is no descent
save  by a narrow stair of many  thousand steps, and  the valley below seems
far away. I looked  on it and saw that, whereas it  had once been  green and
fair, it was now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in
Isengard,  for Saruman was mustering a  great force  on his  own account, in
rivalry of Sauron  and  not  in his service yet. Over  all his works  a dark
smoke hung  and wrapped itself about the sides  of Orthanc. I stood alone on
an island  in the clouds; and I had  no  chance  of escape, and my days were
bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I  had but little room in which to pace
to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North.
`That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt  assured, apart from  the words
of Saruman which might  be  lies.  Long ere I came to  Isengard I had  heard
tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some  hope.  I hoped that Frodo had
set forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendell
before  the deadly pursuit  began. And  both  my  fear and  my  hope  proved
ill-founded. For my  hope  was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was
founded on the cunning of Sauron. But  fat men  who sell ale have many calls
to answer; and the power of  Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in
the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the
hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter  in  the  Shire far
away.'
`I saw you!' cried Frodo. `You were walking backwards and forwards. The
moon shone in your hair.'
Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. 'It was only a dream' said
Frodo, `but it suddenly came back to me. I had  quite  forgotten it. It came
some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.'
`Then it was  late in coming,' said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in
an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom  been in
such need, and  do not bear such  misfortune  well. Gandalf the  Grey caught
like a fly in a spider's treacherous web! Yet  even  the most subtle spiders
may leave a weak thread.
`At first I  feared,  as Saruman  no doubt intended,  that Radagast had
also fallen. Yet I  had caught no  hint of anything wrong in his voice or in
his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I
should  have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed  his
mind and deceived his messenger. It would have been  useless in  any case to
try and  win over  the honest Radagast  to  treachery. He sought me  in good
faith, and so persuaded me.
`That  was the  undoing of Saruman's plot.  For Radagast knew no reason
why  he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards Mirkwood where
he
had many friends of old. And  the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide,
and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs;
and  the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the  lands; and  they heard
news  of the  escape  of  Gollum.  And they sent a messenger to  bring these
tidings to me.
`So it  was  that when summer  waned, there came a night of  moon,  and
Gwaihir the Windlord,  swiftest of  the  Great Eagles,  came unlooked-for to
Orthanc; and he found me standing  on the pinnacle. Then I  spoke to him and
he bore me away, before Saruman was aware.  I was far from Isengard, ere the
wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me.
` "How far can you bear me? " I said to Gwaihir.
` "Many  leagues," said he,  "but not to  the ends of the earth.  I was
sent to bear tidings not burdens."
` "Then I must have a steed on land," I said, "and a steed surpassingly
swift, for I have never had such need of haste before."
` "Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord  of Rohan sits in his
halls," he said; "for that  is not very far off." And I was glad, for in the
Riddermark of Rohan the  Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell, and  there are no
horses  like  those that  are  bred in  that  great vale  between the  Misty
Mountains and the White.
` "Are the Men of  Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? " I said to
Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith.
` "They pay a tribute of horses," he answered, "and send many yearly to
Mordor,  or  so it is said; but they are  not  yet under the  yoke.  But  if
Saruman  has  become evil,  as  you  say, then  their  doom  cannot  be long
delayed."
`He  set  me down  in  the  land of  Rohan ere  dawn;  and  now I  have
lengthened my tale over long. The  rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found
evil already at work:  the lies  of Saruman; and the king  of the land would
not  listen to my warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose
one much to my liking. but little to his. I took the best horse in his land,
and I have never seen the like of him.'
'Then  he must be a noble beast indeed,' said Aragorn; 'and  it grieves
me more than many tidings that might seem worse to  learn that Sauron levies
such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that land.'
`Nor is it now, I  will swear,' said Boromir.  `It  is a lie that comes
from the Enemy.  I  know  the Men of Rohan;  true  and  valiant, our allies,
dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.'
`The  shadow  of  Mordor  lies  on  distant lands,'  answered  Aragorn.
'Saruman has fallen under  it.  Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find
there, if ever you return?'
`Not this at least.' said Boromir, 'that they will buy their lives with
horses. They  love  their horses next  to their kin. And not without reason,
for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from
the Shadow. and their race, as  that of their masters, is descended from the
free days of old.'
'True indeed!'  said Gandalf. `And there is  one among them that  might
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of  the Nine cannot
vie with him; tireless,  swift as the  flowing  wind. Shadowfax  they called
him. By day  his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade,
and  he  passes unseen. Light  is his footfall!  Never  before had  any  man
mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so speedily he bore me that
I  reached the Shire when  Frodo  was on the  Barrow-downs, though I set out
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton.
