Riddermark of Rohan the  Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell, and  there are no
horses  like  those that  are  bred in  that  great vale  between the  Misty
Mountains and the White.
` "Are the Men of  Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? " I said to
Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith.
` "They pay a tribute of horses," he answered, "and send many yearly to
Mordor,  or  so it is said; but they are  not  yet under the  yoke.  But  if
Saruman  has  become evil,  as  you  say, then  their  doom  cannot  be long
delayed."
`He  set  me down  in  the  land of  Rohan ere  dawn;  and  now I  have
lengthened my tale over long. The  rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found
evil already at work:  the lies  of Saruman; and the king  of the land would
not  listen to my warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose
one much to my liking. but little to his. I took the best horse in his land,
and I have never seen the like of him.'
'Then  he must be a noble beast indeed,' said Aragorn; 'and  it grieves
me more than many tidings that might seem worse to  learn that Sauron levies
such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that land.'
`Nor is it now, I  will swear,' said Boromir.  `It  is a lie that comes
from the Enemy.  I  know  the Men of Rohan;  true  and  valiant, our allies,
dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.'
`The  shadow  of  Mordor  lies  on  distant lands,'  answered  Aragorn.
'Saruman has fallen under  it.  Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find
there, if ever you return?'
`Not this at least.' said Boromir, 'that they will buy their lives with
horses. They  love  their horses next  to their kin. And not without reason,
for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from
the Shadow. and their race, as  that of their masters, is descended from the
free days of old.'
'True indeed!'  said Gandalf. `And there is  one among them that  might
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of  the Nine cannot
vie with him; tireless,  swift as the  flowing  wind. Shadowfax  they called
him. By day  his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade,
and  he  passes unseen. Light  is his footfall!  Never  before had  any  man
mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so speedily he bore me that
I  reached the Shire when  Frodo  was on the  Barrow-downs, though I set out
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton.
'But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings of
the Riders, and though I gained  on them day by day,  they were  ever before
me.  They had divided their  forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern
borders,  not far  from the Greenway. and  some  invaded the Shire  from the
south.  I came  to  Hobbiton  and Frodo  had gone; but I had words with  old
Gamgee.  Many  words and  few to  the  point. He  had much to  say about the
shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End.
` "I can't abide changes," said he, "not  at my time of life, and least
of all changes  for  the worst." "Changes for the  worst," he repeated  many
times.
' "Worst is a bad word," I said to him, "and I hope you do not  live to
see it." But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton
less than a week before, and that a  black horseman had come to the Hill the
same  evening. Then I rode  on  in  fear. I came to Buckland and found it in
uproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came
to  the house at  Crickhollow, and  it was broken open and empty; but on the
threshold there lay a  cloak  that had  been Frodo's. Then for a while  hope
left me, and I did not wait  to gather news, or I might have been comforted;
but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was  hard to  follow, for  it went
many ways, and  I was at a loss. But  it  seemed  to me that one  or two had
ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought  of words that might
be said to the innkeeper.
' "Butterbur they call him," thought I. "If this delay was his fault, I
will melt  all the butter in him. I  will roast the  old  fool  over a  slow
fire."  He expected no  less, and when he saw  my face he fell down flat and
began to melt on the spot.'
`What did you  do  to  him?' cried  Frodo in alarm. 'He was really very
kind to us and did all that he could.'
Gandalf laughed.  'Don't be afraid!' he  said. `I  did not bite,  and I
barked very little. So  overjoyed was I by  the news that I got out of  him,
when he stopped  quaking, that I embraced  the old fellow. How it happened I
could  not  then  guess, but I  learned  that you had been in Bree the night
before, and had gone off that morning with Strider.
` "Strider! " I cried, shouting for joy.
`  "Yes,  sir, I am afraid so, sir," said Butterbur, mistaking me.  "He
got  at them,  in spite of all that I could do, and  they took  up with him.
They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say."
` "Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!  " said I. "It's  the
best news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at  the least.
May  your  beer be  laid under an enchantment of surpassing  excellence  for
seven years! " said  I. "Now I can take a night's  rest, the first  since  I
have forgotten when."
`So I  stayed  there that  night, wondering much what had become of the
Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed.  But
in the night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw
down  the gates  and passed  through Bree  like  a  howling  wind;  and  the
Bree-folk are still shivering and  expecting the end of the world. I got  up
before dawn and went after them.
'I do not  know, but it seems clear  to me that this is  what happened.
Their  Captain remained  in secret away  south of Bree, while two rode ahead
through the village,  and four more  invaded the Shire. But when these  were
foiled  in Bree  and  at Crickhollow, they  returned to their  Captain  with
tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for  a while, except by their spies.
The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he  himself
with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath.
'I galloped to Weathertop like  a gale, and I reached it before sundown
on  my  second day from  Bree-and they were there before me.  They drew
away
from  me, for  they  felt the coming of my anger and they dared not  face it
while the Sun  was  in the sky.  But they closed  round at  night, and I was
besieged on the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Syl. I was hard  put to it
indeed:  such light and flame  cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the
war-beacons of old.
`At sunrise I  escaped and fled towards the north. I  could not hope to
do  more. It was impossible to  find you, Frodo, in  the wilderness, and  it
would have been folly  to try  with all the Nine  at  my heels. So I  had to
trust  to Aragorn.  But I  hoped  to draw  some  of them  off, and yet reach
Rivendell ahead of you  and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me,
but they turned back  after a  while and made  for the Ford,  it seems. That
helped a  little,  for there  were only five, not  nine,  when your camp was
attacked.
'I  reached here at last  by  a long  hard  road,  up the Hoarwell  and
through the  Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly fourteen
days  from  Weathertop,  for  I  could  not  ride  among  the rocks  of  the
