` "Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!  " said I. "It's  the
best news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at  the least.
May  your  beer be  laid under an enchantment of surpassing  excellence  for
seven years! " said  I. "Now I can take a night's  rest, the first  since  I
have forgotten when."
`So I  stayed  there that  night, wondering much what had become of the
Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed.  But
in the night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw
down  the gates  and passed  through Bree  like  a  howling  wind;  and  the
Bree-folk are still shivering and  expecting the end of the world. I got  up
before dawn and went after them.
'I do not  know, but it seems clear  to me that this is  what happened.
Their  Captain remained  in secret away  south of Bree, while two rode ahead
through the village,  and four more  invaded the Shire. But when these  were
foiled  in Bree  and  at Crickhollow, they  returned to their  Captain  with
tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for  a while, except by their spies.
The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he  himself
with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath.
'I galloped to Weathertop like  a gale, and I reached it before sundown
on  my  second day from  Bree-and they were there before me.  They drew
away
from  me, for  they  felt the coming of my anger and they dared not  face it
while the Sun  was  in the sky.  But they closed  round at  night, and I was
besieged on the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Syl. I was hard  put to it
indeed:  such light and flame  cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the
war-beacons of old.
`At sunrise I  escaped and fled towards the north. I  could not hope to
do  more. It was impossible to  find you, Frodo, in  the wilderness, and  it
would have been folly  to try  with all the Nine  at  my heels. So I  had to
trust  to Aragorn.  But I  hoped  to draw  some  of them  off, and yet reach
Rivendell ahead of you  and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me,
but they turned back  after a  while and made  for the Ford,  it seems. That
helped a  little,  for there  were only five, not  nine,  when your camp was
attacked.
'I  reached here at last  by  a long  hard  road,  up the Hoarwell  and
through the  Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly fourteen
days  from  Weathertop,  for  I  could  not  ride  among  the rocks  of  the
troll-fells, and  Shadowfax departed.  I sent  him back to his master; but a
great friendship has grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my
call.  But so it  was  that I  came to Rivendell  only three days before the
Ring, and news of  its peril had already been brought here-which proved well
indeed.
`And  that, Frodo, is  the end of my account. May Elrond and the others
forgive  the length of  it.  But such a thing has not happened  before, that
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come  when  he  promised. An account to  the
Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required, I think.
'Well, the  Tale is now  told, from first to last. Here we all are, and
here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any  nearer to our  purpose. What
shall we do with it?'
There was silence. At last Elrond spoke again.
`This  is grievous news concerning Saruman,' he  said; `for  we trusted
him and he  is deep in  all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply
the arts of the Enemy, for  good  or  for ill. But such falls and betrayals,
alas, have happened before. Of  the tales that  we have heard  this  day the
tale  of  Frodo was most strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo
here; and it seems to me that he is  perhaps  not so alone and singular as I
had thought him. The world has changed much since I last was on the
westward
roads.
`The  Barrow-wights we know by  many names; and of the Old Forest
many
tales have been told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern
march. Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what  is now
the  Shire to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and
many things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed
this is still the same that walked the woods and  hills long  ago, and  even
then was older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar we
called  him,  oldest and fatherless. But many another name he has since been
given by other folk:  Forn by the Dwarves,  Orald by Northern Men, and other
names beside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned
him
to our Council.'
`He would not have come,' said Gandalf.
`Could  we not still send messages to him  and obtain his help?'  asked
Erestor. `It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.'
`No, I should not put  it so,'  said Gandalf. `Say rather that the Ring
has no power over him. He is his own master.  But he  cannot alter  the Ring
itself,  nor break its  power over  others.  And now he is withdrawn  into a
little  land,  within  bounds that  he  has set, though none  can  see them,
waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not step beyond them.'
`But within those bounds nothing seems to  dismay him,'  said  Erestor.
`Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?'
`No,' said Gandalf, `not willingly. He might  do so,  if all  the  free
folk of the world begged  him, but he would not understand the need. And  if
he were given  the Ring,  he would soon  forget  it, or most likely throw it
away. Such  things  have  no hold on his mind. He  would  be  a  most unsafe
guardian; and that alone is answer enough.'
`But in any case,' said Glorfindel, `to send the Ring to him would only
postpone the day of evil. He  is far away. We could not now take  it back to
him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy.  And even if we could, soon or late the
Lord of  the Rings would learn of  its hiding place and  would bend  all his
power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not.
I think that in the end, if all  else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last
as he was First; and then Night will come.'
`I know little of Iarwain save the name,' said Galdor; `but Glorfindel,
I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless  such power
is  in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron  can torture and destroy
the very hills. What power still remains lies with us,  here in Imladris, or
with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lurien. But have they the strength, have we
here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the  coming of Sauron at the last,
when all else is overthrown?'
`I have not the strength,' said Elrond; `neither have they.'
`Then if the  Ring cannot be  kept  from him for ever by strength' said
Glorfindel, `two things only remain  for  us to attempt: to send it over the
Sea, or to destroy it.'
`But Gandalf has revealed to us that  we cannot destroy it by any craft
that we here possess,' said Elrond. `And they who dwell beyond the Sea would
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who
still dwell here to deal with it.'
'Then, said Glorfindel, 'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the
lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that  even at the Council his
