Erestor. `It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.'
`No, I should not put  it so,'  said Gandalf. `Say rather that the Ring
has no power over him. He is his own master.  But he  cannot alter  the Ring
itself,  nor break its  power over  others.  And now he is withdrawn  into a
little  land,  within  bounds that  he  has set, though none  can  see them,
waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not step beyond them.'
`But within those bounds nothing seems to  dismay him,'  said  Erestor.
`Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?'
`No,' said Gandalf, `not willingly. He might  do so,  if all  the  free
folk of the world begged  him, but he would not understand the need. And  if
he were given  the Ring,  he would soon  forget  it, or most likely throw it
away. Such  things  have  no hold on his mind. He  would  be  a  most unsafe
guardian; and that alone is answer enough.'
`But in any case,' said Glorfindel, `to send the Ring to him would only
postpone the day of evil. He  is far away. We could not now take  it back to
him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy.  And even if we could, soon or late the
Lord of  the Rings would learn of  its hiding place and  would bend  all his
power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not.
I think that in the end, if all  else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last
as he was First; and then Night will come.'
`I know little of Iarwain save the name,' said Galdor; `but Glorfindel,
I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless  such power
is  in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron  can torture and destroy
the very hills. What power still remains lies with us,  here in Imladris, or
with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lurien. But have they the strength, have we
here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the  coming of Sauron at the last,
when all else is overthrown?'
`I have not the strength,' said Elrond; `neither have they.'
`Then if the  Ring cannot be  kept  from him for ever by strength' said
Glorfindel, `two things only remain  for  us to attempt: to send it over the
Sea, or to destroy it.'
`But Gandalf has revealed to us that  we cannot destroy it by any craft
that we here possess,' said Elrond. `And they who dwell beyond the Sea would
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who
still dwell here to deal with it.'
'Then, said Glorfindel, 'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the
lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that  even at the Council his
feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the Ring  was not lost for
ever, but wished us to think so; for  he began to lust  for  it for himself.
Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.'
`Not safe  for ever,' said Gandalf. `There are many things in the  deep
waters; and seas and lands may  change. And it is not our part here to  take
thought only for a  season, or for a few lives  of Men, or for a passing age
of the world.  We should seek a final  end of this menace, even if we do not
hope to make one.'
'And that we shall not find on the roads to the  Sea,' said Galdor. 'If
the  return to Iarwain be  thought too dangerous, then  flight to the S‚a is
now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us
to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The
Nine have been unhorsed indeed but that is but a respite, ere they find  new
steeds and  swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands  now between him
and a march  in power along the  coasts into  the  North;  and if  he comes,
assailing the White Towers and the  Havens, hereafter the Elves may  have no
escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.'
'Long yet will that march be delayed,' said Boromir. 'Gondor wanes, you
say.  But  Gondor stands,  and even the end  of its strength  is  still very
strong.'
'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back  the Nine,' said Galdor.
'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.'
'Then,' said Erestor, `there are but two courses, as Glorfindel already
has declared:  to hide  the Ring  for ever;  or to  unmake it.  But both are
beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?'
'None here can do so,' said Elrond gravely. `At least none can foretell
what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now
clear which is the road that  we must take. The westward road seems easiest.
Therefore it must  be shunned. It will be watched. Too  often the Elves have
fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen.
There  lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk into  peril-to  Mordor. We must
send the Ring to the Fire.'
Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house,  looking out upon a
sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in
his heart. Boromir  stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He  was fingering  his
great horn and frowning. At length he spoke.
'I do not understand all this,' he said. `Saruman is a traitor, but did
he not have  a  glimpse of  wisdom?  Why  do  you speak  ever of  hiding and
destroying? Why should we not think  that the  Great Ring  has come into our
hands to serve us in the very  hour of need? Wielding  it the Free  Lords of
the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem.
'The  Men of Gondor are valiant, and they  will never  submit; but they
may be  beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weapon. Let the
Ring be  your  weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth
to victory!'
'Alas, no,' said  Elrond. 'We cannot use  the Ruling  Ring. That we now
know  too well.  It belongs to  Sauron and was  made by  him  alone,  and is
altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone  to wield at
will, save only those who have already a great power  of their own.  But for
them it holds an  even deadlier peril.  The very  desire of it  corrupts the
heart. Consider  Saruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow
the  Lord  of Mordor,  using  his own arts,  he  would then  set  himself on
Sauron's throne, and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another
reason  why the  Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the  world it
will be a danger  even to  the Wise. For nothing  is evil in the  beginning.
Even Sauron was not so. I fear to  take the Ring to hide it. I will not take
the Ring to wield it.'
`Nor I,' said Gandalf.
Boromir looked at  them doubtfully,  but he bowed his head. `So be it,'
he said. `Then in Gondor we must trust  to  such weapons as we have.  And at
the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the
Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide --  if the hand that wields it
has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.'
`Who can tell?' said Aragorn. `But we will put it to the test one day.'
`May the  day not be too long delayed,' said Boromir. 'For though  I do
not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort  us to know that others fought
also with all the means that they have.'
`Then  be comforted,'  said  Elrond.  `For  there are  other powers and
realms that  you know not, and  they are hidden from you.  Anduin  the Great
flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.'
'Still it might be  well for all,' said Gluin the Dwarf,  'if all these
strengths were joined, and  the powers  of each  were used in  league. Other
rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be  used in  our need.  The
Seven are lost  to us -- if Balin has not found the ring of Thrur which  was
