he not have  a  glimpse of  wisdom?  Why  do  you speak  ever of  hiding and
destroying? Why should we not think  that the  Great Ring  has come into our
hands to serve us in the very  hour of need? Wielding  it the Free  Lords of
the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem.
'The  Men of Gondor are valiant, and they  will never  submit; but they
may be  beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weapon. Let the
Ring be  your  weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth
to victory!'
'Alas, no,' said  Elrond. 'We cannot use  the Ruling  Ring. That we now
know  too well.  It belongs to  Sauron and was  made by  him  alone,  and is
altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone  to wield at
will, save only those who have already a great power  of their own.  But for
them it holds an  even deadlier peril.  The very  desire of it  corrupts the
heart. Consider  Saruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow
the  Lord  of Mordor,  using  his own arts,  he  would then  set  himself on
Sauron's throne, and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another
reason  why the  Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the  world it
will be a danger  even to  the Wise. For nothing  is evil in the  beginning.
Even Sauron was not so. I fear to  take the Ring to hide it. I will not take
the Ring to wield it.'
`Nor I,' said Gandalf.
Boromir looked at  them doubtfully,  but he bowed his head. `So be it,'
he said. `Then in Gondor we must trust  to  such weapons as we have.  And at
the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the
Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide --  if the hand that wields it
has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.'
`Who can tell?' said Aragorn. `But we will put it to the test one day.'
`May the  day not be too long delayed,' said Boromir. 'For though  I do
not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort  us to know that others fought
also with all the means that they have.'
`Then  be comforted,'  said  Elrond.  `For  there are  other powers and
realms that  you know not, and  they are hidden from you.  Anduin  the Great
flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.'
'Still it might be  well for all,' said Gluin the Dwarf,  'if all these
strengths were joined, and  the powers  of each  were used in  league. Other
rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be  used in  our need.  The
Seven are lost  to us -- if Balin has not found the ring of Thrur which  was
the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrur  perished in Moria. Indeed
I  may  now reveal that it was partly in  hope to find that  ring that Balin
went away.'
`Balin will find no  ring in  Moria,'  said  Gandalf. `Thrur gave it to
Thrbin his  son,  but not Thrbin to Thorin. It was taken  with  torment from
Thrbin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.'
'Ah, alas!' cried Gluin.  'When will  the day come of our  revenge? But
still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mighty
Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by
the Dark  Lord long ago. Are  they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not
say?'
The  Elves returned  no answer.  `Did you not  hear  me,  Gluin?'  said
Elrond.  `The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But
of them it  is not permitted to speak. So much only in this' hour of doubt I
may now say. They are not idle. But they were  not made as weapons of war or
conquest:  that is  not  their power.  Those who  made  them did  not desire
strength or  domination or  hoarded wealth, but understanding,  making,  and
healing,  to preserve  all  things  unstained.  These things  the  Elves  of
Middle-earth have in  some measure gained,  though with sorrow. But all that
has  been wrought  by those who wield the Three will turn  to their undoing,
and their minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.'
`But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring  were  destroyed as you
counsel?' asked Gluin.
'We know not for certain,' answered  Elrond sadly. `Some hope that  the
Three Rings,  which Sauron  has never touched,  would  then become free, and
their  rulers might heal  the  hurts of  the world that he has wrought.  But
maybe  when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will
fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.'
`Yet all  the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel
'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be
taken away for ever.'
'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,' said Erestor,
`and  yet we come  no  nearer. What  strength have we for the finding of the
Fire in which  it was made? That  is  the path of despair. Of folly I  would
say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.'
'Despair, or folly?' said Gandalf.  `It is not  despair, for despair is
only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not.  It is wisdom to
recognize  necessity,  when all  other courses have been  weighed, though as
folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our
cloak, a veil before the eyes of the  Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs
all  things to a nicety in  the scales  of his malice. But the only  measure
that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into
his  heart  the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that  having
the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of
reckoning.'
'At  least  for a while,' said  Elrond. `The road must  be trod, but it
will  be very hard. And neither strength nor  wisdom will  carry us far upon
it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong.
Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small
hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.'
'Very  well,  very well,  Master Elrond!'  said Bilbo suddenly. 'Say no
more! It  is plain enough  what you are  pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit
started this  affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very
comfortable here, and getting  on  with my  book.  If you want to know, I am
just  writing  an  ending  for it.  I had  thought of putting:            and  he lived
happily ever afterwards  to the end of  his days            .  It is a  good ending, and
none the worse for having been used before. Now  I shall have to alter that:
it does not look  like coming true;  and anyway there will evidently have to
be  several  more chapters, if  I live to  write  them.  It  is  a frightful
nuisance. When ought I to start?
' Boromir  looked  in surprise  at Bilbo, but the laughter died  on his
lips  when he saw that  all the others regarded  the  old  hobbit with grave
respect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.
`Of course,  my dear Bilbo,' said Gandalf. `If  you had  really started
this affair,  you might be expected to finish  it. But you know  well enough
now that    starting   is too great a claim for  any, and that only  a small part
is played in  great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was
meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you  are  making a valiant offer.
But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has
passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your  part is
ended,  unless  as a  recorder.  Finish  your book,  and  leave  the  ending
unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when
they come back.'
