only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not.  It is wisdom to
recognize  necessity,  when all  other courses have been  weighed, though as
folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our
cloak, a veil before the eyes of the  Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs
all  things to a nicety in  the scales  of his malice. But the only  measure
that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into
his  heart  the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that  having
the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of
reckoning.'
'At  least  for a while,' said  Elrond. `The road must  be trod, but it
will  be very hard. And neither strength nor  wisdom will  carry us far upon
it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong.
Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small
hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.'
'Very  well,  very well,  Master Elrond!'  said Bilbo suddenly. 'Say no
more! It  is plain enough  what you are  pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit
started this  affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very
comfortable here, and getting  on  with my  book.  If you want to know, I am
just  writing  an  ending  for it.  I had  thought of putting:            and  he lived
happily ever afterwards  to the end of  his days            .  It is a  good ending, and
none the worse for having been used before. Now  I shall have to alter that:
it does not look  like coming true;  and anyway there will evidently have to
be  several  more chapters, if  I live to  write  them.  It  is  a frightful
nuisance. When ought I to start?
' Boromir  looked  in surprise  at Bilbo, but the laughter died  on his
lips  when he saw that  all the others regarded  the  old  hobbit with grave
respect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.
`Of course,  my dear Bilbo,' said Gandalf. `If  you had  really started
this affair,  you might be expected to finish  it. But you know  well enough
now that    starting   is too great a claim for  any, and that only  a small part
is played in  great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was
meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you  are  making a valiant offer.
But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has
passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your  part is
ended,  unless  as a  recorder.  Finish  your book,  and  leave  the  ending
unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when
they come back.'
Bilbo laughed. `I have never known you give me pleasant advice before.'
he said.  `As  all your  unpleasant  advice has been  good, I wonder if this
advice is not  bad. Still, I don't suppose I have the strength  or luck left
to deal with the Ring. It has  grown, and I have  not.  But tell me: what do
you mean by      they  ?'
`The messengers who are sent with the Ring.'
`Exactly! And who are  they to be?  That seems to me  what this Council
has to decide, and all  that  it has to decide. Elves  may  thrive on speech
alone, and Dwarves endure great weariness;  but I am only an old hobbit, and
I miss  my meal at noon. Can't you think of some  names  now?  Or put it off
till after dinner?'
No one answered. The  noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced
at all the faces, but they were not  turned to him. All the Council sat with
downcast eyes,  as if in deep  thought. A great dread fell on him,  as if he
was  awaiting  the pronouncement of some doom that he had long foreseen  and
vainly  hoped might after all never be spoken.  An  overwhelming longing  to
rest and remain at peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all  his heart.
At last with an effort  he spoke, and wondered to hear his  own words, as if
some other will was using his small voice.
`I will take the Ring,' he said, `though I do not know the way.'
Elrond raised  his eyes and looked  at  him, and Frodo felt  his  heart
pierced by the sudden keenness  of the glance. `If  I understand aright  all
that I  have heard,' he said, `I think that this task  is appointed for you,
Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no  one will. This is the hour  of
the Shire-folk, when they arise from  their quiet fields to shake the towers
and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise  could  have foreseen it? Or,
if they are wise, why  should they expect  to know it,  until  the hour  has
struck?
`But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that  none could lay it on another.
I do not lay it  on  you. But  if you  take it freely, I  will say that your
choice  is right;  and though all the mighty elf-friends of  old, Hador, and
H®rin, and T®rin, and Beren himself were assembled together your seat
should
be among them.'
`But you won't send him off alone surely, Master?' cried Sam, unable to
contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner where he had been
quietly sitting on the floor.
`No indeed!'  said Elrond, turning towards  him with a smile.  `You  at
least shall go with him. It  is  hardly  possible to separate  you from him,
even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.'
Sam sat  down, blushing and muttering.  `A nice  pickle we  have landed
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!' he said, shaking his head.
