`No indeed!'  said Elrond, turning towards  him with a smile.  `You  at
least shall go with him. It  is  hardly  possible to separate  you from him,
even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.'
Sam sat  down, blushing and muttering.  `A nice  pickle we  have landed
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!' he said, shaking his head.
Chapter 3. The Ring Goes South
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room.
Merry  and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the
Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion.
`It's most  unfair,' said  Pippin. `Instead of  throwing  him out,  and
clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!'
`Rewards!'  said Frodo.  'I can't imagine a more severe punishment. You
are not  thinking what  you  are saying:  condemned  to  go on this hopeless
journey, a  reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my  task  was done, and I could
rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.'
'I don't wonder,' said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envying
Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be  a punishment for any of us
to  be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have  come a long way with you and
been through some stiff times. We want to go on.'
`That's  what  I  meant,'  said  Pippin. `We  hobbits  ought  to  stick
together, and  we will. I shall go,  unless they chain me up.  There must be
someone with intelligence in the party.'
'Then  you certainly will not  be chosen, Peregrin Took!' said Gandalf,
looking in through  the window, which was  near the ground. `But you are all
worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet.'
`Nothing  decided!' cried Pippin. 'Then what  were  you  all doing? You
were shut up for hours.'
"Talking,' said Bilbo. `There was a deal  of  talk, and everyone had an
eye-opener. Even old Gandalf.  I think Legolas's  bit  of news  about Gollum
caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.'
`You were wrong,'  said Gandalf. 'You  were  inattentive. I had already
heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as
you put  it,  were you  and Frodo;  and  I was  the  only  one  that was not
surprised.'
`Well,  anyway,'  said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor
Frodo  and Sam. I was  afraid all  the time that it might come to that, if I
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the
reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?'
'Yes,' said the wizard. `Some of the scouts have been sent out already.
More will go  tomorrow.  Elrond is sending Elves, and they will get in touch
with the Rangers, and maybe  with  Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And
Aragorn
has gone with Elrond's  sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for
many long  leagues before any  move is  made. So cheer  up, Frodo! You  will
probably make quite a long stay here.'
'Ah!' said  Sam gloomily.  'We'll  just wait long enough for  winter to
come.'
'That can't be  helped,' said Bilbo.  'It's your fault partly, Frodo my
lad: insisting on waiting  for my  birthday. A  funny way of honouring it, I
can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't
go till the reports come back.
When winter first begins to bite
and stones crack in the frosty night,
when pools are black and trees are bare,
'tis evil in the Wild to fare.
But that I am afraid will be just your luck.'
'I am  afraid  it  will,' said Gandalf. 'We  can't start until  we have
found out about the Riders.'
`I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry.
'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,' said Gandalf. `The power of
their master  is in them, and  they stand or fall by  him. We hope that they
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous;  but
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to  help you; but I will
whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in
the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.'
So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the
window-sill, where he  had been sitting, and took off his hat and  bowed. 'I
only said   I think I shall come     . Do not count on anything yet. In this matter
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me,
I want to see Elrond. I must be off.'
`How long  do you  think I  shall have here?' said  Frodo to Bilbo when
Gandalf had gone.
`Oh,  I don't know. I can't count  days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'But
quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping
