More will go  tomorrow.  Elrond is sending Elves, and they will get in touch
with the Rangers, and maybe  with  Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And
Aragorn
has gone with Elrond's  sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for
many long  leagues before any  move is  made. So cheer  up, Frodo! You  will
probably make quite a long stay here.'
'Ah!' said  Sam gloomily.  'We'll  just wait long enough for  winter to
come.'
'That can't be  helped,' said Bilbo.  'It's your fault partly, Frodo my
lad: insisting on waiting  for my  birthday. A  funny way of honouring it, I
can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't
go till the reports come back.
When winter first begins to bite
and stones crack in the frosty night,
when pools are black and trees are bare,
'tis evil in the Wild to fare.
But that I am afraid will be just your luck.'
'I am  afraid  it  will,' said Gandalf. 'We  can't start until  we have
found out about the Riders.'
`I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry.
'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,' said Gandalf. `The power of
their master  is in them, and  they stand or fall by  him. We hope that they
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous;  but
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to  help you; but I will
whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in
the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.'
So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the
window-sill, where he  had been sitting, and took off his hat and  bowed. 'I
only said   I think I shall come     . Do not count on anything yet. In this matter
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me,
I want to see Elrond. I must be off.'
`How long  do you  think I  shall have here?' said  Frodo to Bilbo when
Gandalf had gone.
`Oh,  I don't know. I can't count  days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'But
quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping
me with my book, and making a  start  on the next?  Have you  thought of  an
ending?'
'Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,' said Frodo.
'Oh, that won't do!' said Bilbo. `Books ought to have good endings. How
would this do:      and they all  settled  down and  lived together happily ever
after ?'
`It will do well, if it ever comes to that,' said Frodo.
'Ah!' said Sam. 'And where will they live? That's what I often wonder.'
For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past journey
and of the perils  that  lay ahead; but such  was the  virtue of the land of
Rivendell that soon all  fear  and anxiety was lifted  from their minds. The
future, good or  ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have  any  power over
the present. Health and hope grew strong in them, and they were content with
each good day as it came, taking pleasure in every  meal,  and in every word
and song.
So the days slipped away, as  each morning dawned  bright and fair, and
each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was waning fast; slowly the
golden light  faded to pale silver, and the  lingering leaves fell  from the
naked trees. A wind began to  blow  chill  from  the  Misty Mountains to the
east. The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the  night sky, and put to flight all
the  lesser stars. But low  in the South one star shone red. Every night, as
the  Moon  waned  again,  it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it
from his window, deep in the heavens burning like a watchful eye that glared
above the trees on the brink of the valley.
The hobbits had been nearly  two  months  in the House  of  Elrond, and
November  had  gone by  with the  last  shreds  of autumn, and  December was
passing, when the scouts  began to  return. Some  had  gone north beyond the
springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors;  and others had gone west,  and
with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the
Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed  the river by
a ruined town. Many had gone east and south; and some  of these had  crossed
the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the pass at the
source of the Gladden River, and had come  down into Wilderland and over the
Gladden  Fields  and so at  length had reached the old  home  of Radagast at
Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and they had  returned over the high pass
that was called the Dimrill Stair. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and  Elrohir,
were the  last  to return;  they had  made a great journey, passing down the
Silverlode into  a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak
to any save to Elrond.
In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings  of the
Riders  or other  servants of the  Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the  Misty
Mountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing had been seen  or heard of
Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far
up the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned
in  the flooded Ford.  On  the  rocks  of  the  rapids  below  it  searchers
discovered the bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and
tattered. Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North.
'Eight  out of the Nine are  accounted for at least,' said Gandalf. 'It
is  rash  to  be  too  sure,  yet I think that  we  may hope  now  that  the
Ringwraiths  were  scattered,  and  have been obliged to return as best they
could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.
`If that  is so,  it will be some time before they  can begin the  hunt
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to journey
all the way to  the borders of Rivendell before they can pick  up our trail.
And  if we are  careful that  will be  hard to find.  But  we  must delay no
longer.'
Elrond  summoned the hobbits to him.  He looked gravely  at Frodo. 'The
time has  come,' he said.  `If the Ring is to set out, it  must go soon. But
those who go with it must  not  count on their  errand being aided by war or
force.  They  must pass into the domain of  the Enemy far from  aid. Do  you
still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?'
'I do,' said Frodo. `I will go with Sam.'
`Then  I cannot help you  much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond. `I
can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved  I
do not know. The  Shadow has  crept now  to the  feet  of the Mountains, and
draws nigh even  to  the  borders of Greyflood; and  under the Shadow all is
dark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and
you
may find friends upon your way when you  least look for it. I will send  out
messages, such  as I can contrive, to  those  whom I know in the wide world;
but so  perilous are the  lands now become that some  may well  miscarry, or
come no quicker than you yourself.
`And I will choose you companions to go with  you, as far as  they will
