Silverlode into  a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak
to any save to Elrond.
In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings  of the
Riders  or other  servants of the  Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the  Misty
Mountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing had been seen  or heard of
Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far
up the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned
in  the flooded Ford.  On  the  rocks  of  the  rapids  below  it  searchers
discovered the bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and
tattered. Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North.
'Eight  out of the Nine are  accounted for at least,' said Gandalf. 'It
is  rash  to  be  too  sure,  yet I think that  we  may hope  now  that  the
Ringwraiths  were  scattered,  and  have been obliged to return as best they
could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.
`If that  is so,  it will be some time before they  can begin the  hunt
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to journey
all the way to  the borders of Rivendell before they can pick  up our trail.
And  if we are  careful that  will be  hard to find.  But  we  must delay no
longer.'
Elrond  summoned the hobbits to him.  He looked gravely  at Frodo. 'The
time has  come,' he said.  `If the Ring is to set out, it  must go soon. But
those who go with it must  not  count on their  errand being aided by war or
force.  They  must pass into the domain of  the Enemy far from  aid. Do  you
still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?'
'I do,' said Frodo. `I will go with Sam.'
`Then  I cannot help you  much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond. `I
can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved  I
do not know. The  Shadow has  crept now  to the  feet  of the Mountains, and
draws nigh even  to  the  borders of Greyflood; and  under the Shadow all is
dark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and
you
may find friends upon your way when you  least look for it. I will send  out
messages, such  as I can contrive, to  those  whom I know in the wide world;
but so  perilous are the  lands now become that some  may well  miscarry, or
come no quicker than you yourself.
`And I will choose you companions to go with  you, as far as  they will
or fortune  allows. The number must be  few, since your hope is in speed and
secrecy. Had  I a host of Elves  in armour of the Elder Days, it would avail
little, save to arouse the power of Mordor.
`The Company of the Ring  shall be Nine;  and the Nine Walkers shall be
set  against  the  Nine Riders  that are  evil. With you and  your  faithful
servant, Gandalf will go;  for this shall be his  great task,  and maybe the
end of his labours.
`For  the  rest, they  shall represent the  other  Free Peoples  of the
World:  Elves, Dwarves, and  Men. Legolas  shall be for the Elves; and Gimli
son of Gluin for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least  to the passes
of the  Mountains,  and maybe beyond. For men you shall have  Aragorn son of
Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.'
`Strider!' said Frodo.
'Yes,' he  said  with  a  smile.  `I ask  leave  once again to be  your
companion, Frodo.'
`I would have begged you to come,' said Frodo, 'only I thought you were
going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.'
`I am,' said  Aragorn. `And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be reforged
ere I  set out to  war. But your road  and our  road  lie  together for many
hundreds  of  miles. Therefore Boromir  will also be in the Company. He is a
valiant man.'
'There remain  two more  to  be  found,'  said  Elrond.  "These  I will
consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.'
`But  that will leave  no place for  us!'  cried Pippin in  dismay. `We
don't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.'
`That  is  because  you do not understand and cannot imagine what  lies
ahead,' said Elrond.
`Neither  does Frodo,'  said  Gandalf,  unexpectedly supporting Pippin.
'Nor do  any of us see clearly. It is true that  if these hobbits understood
the danger, they would  not dare to go. But they would  still wish to go, or
wish that  they dared, and be shamed  and unhappy.  I think, Elrond, that in
this matter it  would be well to  trust  rather  to their friendship than to
great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord,  such as  Glorfindel, he
could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road  to the Fire by the  power
that is in him.'
`You  speak  gravely,'  said Elrond, `but  I am in doubt. The Shire,  I
forebode,  is not free now from peril;  and these two I had thought to  send
back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of
their country, to warn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that
the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,  should remain. My heart is against
his going.'
`Then, Master Elrond, you will have to  lock  me in prison,  or send me
home  tied in  a  sack,'  said  Pippin. `For  otherwise  I shall follow  the
Company.'
`Let it be so then. You shall go,' said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now the
tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.'
The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade
was traced  a device  of seven  stars set between the crescent Moon and  the
rayed Sun,  and  about  them  was written  many  runes; for  Aragorn son  of
Arathorn  was going to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was  that
sword  when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it,
and the light of the  moon shone cold, and its edge  was hard and  keen. And
Aragorn gave it a new name and called it And®ril, Flame of the West.
Aragorn and Gandalf walked together  or sat speaking of  their road and
the  perils they  would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with
them; but  he was content to  lean on their guidance,  and he spent  as much
time as he could with Bilbo.
In those  last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren
and L®thien and the winning of the  Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were  to be found with Bilbo in
his  own small  room.  Then Bilbo would  read  passages from his book (which
still seemed very incomplete). or scraps of his verses, or  would take notes
of Frodo's adventures.
On the morning of the last day Frodo  was alone with Bilbo, and the old
hobbit  pulled  out from under his bed a wooden box.  He lifted  the lid and
fumbled inside.
'Here  is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it
to  keep it safe but I've  forgotten to ask if the smiths  could mend it. No
time now..  So I thought, perhaps,  you would care to have this,  don't  you
know?'
He took from the box  a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard.
Then he drew it, and  its polished and well-tended blade glittered suddenly,
