back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of
their country, to warn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that
the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,  should remain. My heart is against
his going.'
`Then, Master Elrond, you will have to  lock  me in prison,  or send me
home  tied in  a  sack,'  said  Pippin. `For  otherwise  I shall follow  the
Company.'
`Let it be so then. You shall go,' said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now the
tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.'
The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade
was traced  a device  of seven  stars set between the crescent Moon and  the
rayed Sun,  and  about  them  was written  many  runes; for  Aragorn son  of
Arathorn  was going to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was  that
sword  when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it,
and the light of the  moon shone cold, and its edge  was hard and  keen. And
Aragorn gave it a new name and called it And®ril, Flame of the West.
Aragorn and Gandalf walked together  or sat speaking of  their road and
the  perils they  would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with
them; but  he was content to  lean on their guidance,  and he spent  as much
time as he could with Bilbo.
In those  last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren
and L®thien and the winning of the  Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were  to be found with Bilbo in
his  own small  room.  Then Bilbo would  read  passages from his book (which
still seemed very incomplete). or scraps of his verses, or  would take notes
of Frodo's adventures.
On the morning of the last day Frodo  was alone with Bilbo, and the old
hobbit  pulled  out from under his bed a wooden box.  He lifted  the lid and
fumbled inside.
'Here  is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it
to  keep it safe but I've  forgotten to ask if the smiths  could mend it. No
time now..  So I thought, perhaps,  you would care to have this,  don't  you
know?'
He took from the box  a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard.
Then he drew it, and  its polished and well-tended blade glittered suddenly,
cold  and bright. 'This is Sting,' he said, and thrust it with little effort
deep into a wooden beam. `Take it, if  you like.  I shan't want  it again, I
expect.'
Frodo accepted it gratefully.
'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to
be rather  heavy for  its size. He unwound several folds of  old cloth,  and
held up a small shirt of  mail. It was close-woven of many  rings, as supple
almost as linen, cold as ice,  and  harder than steel. It shone like moonlit
silver,  and  was studded  with white gems. With it  was a belt of pearl and
crystal.
'It's  a pretty thing,  isn't it?'  said Bilbo, moving it in the light.
`And  useful.  It  is my dwarf-mail that  Thorin gave me. I got it back from
Michel Delving before I started,  and packed  it with my  luggage: I brought
all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the Ring. But I did not
expect to use this, and I don't need it  now, except to  look  at sometimes.
You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.'
`I  should look -- well, I don't think I should look right in it,' said
Frodo.
`Just what I said myself,' said Bilbo. 'But never mind about looks. You
can wear it under your  outer clothes.  Come  on! You must share this secret
with me. Don't tell anybody else! But I should  feel happier  if I knew  you
were wearing it.  I have a fancy it would turn even the  knives of the Black
Riders,' he ended in a low voice.
`Very  well, I will take  it,' said  Frodo. Bilbo  put  it  on him, and
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top his
old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.
'Just a  plain hobbit you  look,' said Bilbo.  'But there is more about
you now than  appears  on the surface. Good luck to you!' He turned away and
looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune.
'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo,  for this, and for all our past
kindnesses,' said Frodo.
'Don't try!' said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him on the
back.  `Ow!' he cried. `You are  too  hard  now  to slap! But there you are:
Hobbits must stick together, and especially  Bagginses. All I  ask in return
is: take  as much care of yourself as you can. and  bring  back all the news
you can, and  any old  songs and  tales you can come by. I'll do  my best to
finish my book before you return. I should like to write the second book, if
I am spared.' He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly.
I sit beside the fire and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-flowers and butterflies
in summers that have been;
Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.
I sit beside the fire and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a spring
that I shall ever see.
For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every spring
there is a different green.
I sit beside the fire and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was  a  cold grey  day near the end of  December.  The East Wind was
streaming through  the  bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark
pines on the hills. Ragged clouds  were hurrying overhead,  dark and low. As
the cheerless shadows  of the early evening began  to  fall the Company made
ready to set out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrond  counselled them to
