maybe he sees things that ain't there.'
'But  this  one was as big  as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven
yards to a stride, if it was an inch.'
'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw           was   an elm  tree, as like as
not.'
'But this one was      walking,   I tell you; and there  ain't no elm tree on
the North Moors.'
'Then Hal can't have  seen one,' said Ted. There  was some laughing and
clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point.
'All  the same,'  said  Sam,  'you can't deny  that others besides  our
Halfast have seen  queer  folk crossing the  Shire - crossing  it, mind you:
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders  have never
been so busy before.
'And I've heard tell  that Elves are moving west. They do  say they are
going to the harbours, out away beyond the  White Towers.' Sam waved his
arm
vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the
old towers  beyond  the western borders  of the  Shire. But  it was  an  old
tradition that  away over  there stood the Grey  Havens, from which at times
elven-ships set sail, never to return.
'They are sailing,  sailing, sailing over the Sea,  they are going into
the West  and  leaving us,' said  Sam, half chanting the words, shaking  his
head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.
'Well,  that isn't anything  new, if you believe the  old tales.  And I
don't see  what it matters to me or you.  Let  them sail!  But I warrant you
haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.'
'Well I don't  know,' said Sam  thoughtfully. He believed he  had  once
seen an Elf in the  woods, and still hoped to  see more one  day. Of all the
legends  that he had heard in his  early  years such fragments of tales  and
half-remembered  stories  about  the Elves as the hobbits knew,  had  always
moved him  most deeply. 'There  are some,  even in these parts, as  know the
Fair Folk and get news  of them,'  he said. 'There's Mr. Baggins now, that I
work for. He told me  that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more:  many's the  talk I had with  him  when I was a
little lad.'
'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked,
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where  you get your news from, you'll  never
want for moonshine. Well,  friends,  I'm  off home.  Your  good  health!' He
drained his mug and went out noisily.
Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. For
one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have
a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But
Sam had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up
and went out.
It was  early April and the sky was now clearing after  heavy rain. The
sun was down,  and  a cool  pale evening was quietly fading  into night.  He
walked  home  under  the  early stars  through  Hobbiton and  up  the  Hill,
whistling softly and thoughtfully.
It  was  just at  this  time that  Gandalf  reappeared  after his  long
absence. For three years  after  the Party he had  been away.  Then he  paid
Frodo a brief visit,  and after taking a good look at him he went off again.
During  the  next  year  or  two  he  had  turned  up  fairly often,  coming
unexpectedly  after  dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise.  He
would  not  discuss  his  own  business  and  journeys, and  seemed  chiefly
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings.
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo
had seen or heard of him, and  he had begun  to think that  the wizard would
never return and  had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as
Sam was walking home  and twilight was fading, there came the once  familiar
tap on the study window.
Frodo welcomed  his old friend with  surprise  and great delight.  They
looked hard at one another.
'Ah well eh?' said Gandalf. 'You look the same as ever, Frodo!'
'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked
older and  more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide
world, and  soon they were  deep in talk, and  they stayed  up far into  the
night.
Next morning after a late breakfast, the  wizard was sitting with Frodo
by the open  window of the  study. A bright fire was on the hearth,  but the
sun was warm, and  the  wind was in the  South. Everything looked fresh, and
the new green of Spring  was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the
trees' fingers.
Gandalf  was thinking of  a  spring,  nearly  eighty years before, when
Bilbo  had run out  of Bag End without  a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps
whiter  than it  had  been  then,  and his  beard  and eyebrows were perhaps
longer, and  his face more lined with care and  wisdom; but his eyes were as
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with the same vigour  and
delight.
He was  smoking  now in  silence, for  Frodo was sitting still, deep in
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.
'Last  night  you  began to  tell  me  strange  things  about  my ring,
Gandalf,' he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters
were best left until  daylight. Don't you think  you  had better finish now?
You  say the ring  is dangerous,  far more  dangerous than  I guess. In what
way?'
'In many  ways,' answered  the wizard. It is far  more powerful than  I
ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the  end it  would utterly
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him.
'In Eregion long  ago many Elven-rings  were made,  magic  rings as you
call them, and they were, of course, of various  kinds: some more potent and
some  less.  The lesser rings were only essays  in the craft before  it  was
full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but  trifles - yet still to my
mind dangerous for mortals. But  the Great Rings,  the Rings of Power,  they
were perilous.
'A  mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great  Rings, does not die, but
he does not  grow  or obtain more life, he merely continues, until  at  last
every minute is a weariness. And if he often  uses the Ring  to make himself
invisible,  he   fades:   he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks
in the twilight under the eye of the  dark power that rules the Rings.  Yes,
sooner or  later - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but
neither strength nor good purpose will last - sooner or later the dark power
will devour him.'
'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.
'How long have you  known this?'  asked Frodo  at length. 'And how much
did Bilbo know?'
'Bilbo knew no  more than he told you, I  am  sure,' said Gandalf.  'He
would certainly never have  passed on  to you anything that he thought would
be a danger, even though I  promised to  look after you. He thought the ring
was very beautiful, and very  useful at  need;  and if anything was wrong or
