I am spared.' He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly.
I sit beside the fire and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-flowers and butterflies
in summers that have been;
Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.
I sit beside the fire and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a spring
that I shall ever see.
For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every spring
there is a different green.
I sit beside the fire and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was  a  cold grey  day near the end of  December.  The East Wind was
streaming through  the  bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark
pines on the hills. Ragged clouds  were hurrying overhead,  dark and low. As
the cheerless shadows  of the early evening began  to  fall the Company made
ready to set out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrond  counselled them to
journey  under cover  of night as often as  they could,  until they were far
from Rivendell.
`You should fear the many eyes  of the servants of Sauron,' he said. 'I
do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached
him, and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot  and  wing
will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the  sky above you must beware
as you go on your way.'
The Company took little gear of war,  for their hope was in secrecy not
in battle. Aragorn had And®ril  but no other weapon, and he went  forth clad
only in rusty green and brown. as a  Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a
long sword,  in fashion like And®ril but of less  lineage and he bore also a
shield and his war-horn.
'Loud and  clear it sounds  in the valleys of the hills,' he said, `and
then  let all the foes  of Gondor  flee!' Putting  it to  his lips he blew a
blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that voice
in Rivendell sprang to their feet.
Slow  should you  be to  wind  that  horn again,  Boromir, said Elrond.
'until you stand once more on the  borders of your land, and dire need is on
you.'
`Maybe,' said Boromir.  'But always I have let my  horn cry  at setting
forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth
as a thief in the night.'
Gimli the  dwarf alone wore  openly  a short shirt of steel-rings,  for
dwarves make  light  of burdens;  and in  his  belt was a  broad-bladed axe.
Legolas had  a bow and a  quiver,  and  at his belt a long  white knife. The
younger  hobbits wore the swords that they had  taken  from the  barrow; but
Frodo took only Sting;  and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden.
Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was  the elven-sword Glamdring,
the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon  the breast of Thorin under the Lonely
Mountain.
All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and they had
jackets and cloaks lined with  fur. Spare food and clothes  and blankets and
other needs were laden on a  pony, none other  than the poor beast that they
had brought from Bree.
?he stay  in Rivendell had  worked a  great wonder of change on him: he
was  glossy and seemed  to  have  the vigour of youth.  It  was  Sam who had
insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would pine,
if he did not come.
`That  animal can nearly talk,' he said, `and  would talk, if he stayed
here  much longer. He gave me a  look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it:
if you don't  let me go  with you, Sam, I'll follow  on my own.' So Bill was
going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that
did not seem depressed.
Their  farewells had been  said in the great hall by the fire, and they
were only waiting now for  Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in
many windows. Bilbo  huddled in a cloak stood silent  on the doorstep beside
Frodo.  Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey  shapes in the
darkness.
Sam was  standing by the  pony, sucking  his teeth, and staring moodily
into  the  gloom  where  the  river  roared  stonily below;  his  desire for
adventure was at its lowest ebb.
`Bill,  my lad,' he said,  `you oughtn't to have took up  with us.  You
could have stayed here and et the best hay  till the  new grass comes.' Bill
swished his tail and said nothing.
Sam  eased the pack on  his shoulders, and  went over anxiously  in his
mind all the things that he had stowed in it,  wondering if he had forgotten
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the  little  box of salt
that he  always carried  and  refilled  when he  could;  a  good  supply  of
pipe-weed (but not near enough,  I'll  warrant); flint  and tinder;  woollen
hose:  linen;  various  small  belongings  of his  master's that  Frodo  had
forgotten and Sam had  stowed to  bring them out in  triumph when they  were
called for. He went through them all.
'Rope!'  he  muttered. `No  rope!  And  only  last night  you  said  to
yourself: "Sam, what about a bit of rope? You'll want it, if you haven't got
it:" Well, I'll want it. I can't get it now.'
At that moment Elrond came out with  Gandalf, and he called the Company
to him. 'This is my last  word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer is
setting  out on the Quest  of  Mount Doom. On him  alone is any charge laid:
neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy
nor  indeed to  let any  handle  it,  save  members of  the Company  and the
Council,  and  only then in  gravest need. The others  go  with him  as free
companions,  to help him on his way.  You may tarry,  or come back, or  turn
