if he did not come.
`That  animal can nearly talk,' he said, `and  would talk, if he stayed
here  much longer. He gave me a  look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it:
if you don't  let me go  with you, Sam, I'll follow  on my own.' So Bill was
going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that
did not seem depressed.
Their  farewells had been  said in the great hall by the fire, and they
were only waiting now for  Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in
many windows. Bilbo  huddled in a cloak stood silent  on the doorstep beside
Frodo.  Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey  shapes in the
darkness.
Sam was  standing by the  pony, sucking  his teeth, and staring moodily
into  the  gloom  where  the  river  roared  stonily below;  his  desire for
adventure was at its lowest ebb.
`Bill,  my lad,' he said,  `you oughtn't to have took up  with us.  You
could have stayed here and et the best hay  till the  new grass comes.' Bill
swished his tail and said nothing.
Sam  eased the pack on  his shoulders, and  went over anxiously  in his
mind all the things that he had stowed in it,  wondering if he had forgotten
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the  little  box of salt
that he  always carried  and  refilled  when he  could;  a  good  supply  of
pipe-weed (but not near enough,  I'll  warrant); flint  and tinder;  woollen
hose:  linen;  various  small  belongings  of his  master's that  Frodo  had
forgotten and Sam had  stowed to  bring them out in  triumph when they  were
called for. He went through them all.
'Rope!'  he  muttered. `No  rope!  And  only  last night  you  said  to
yourself: "Sam, what about a bit of rope? You'll want it, if you haven't got
it:" Well, I'll want it. I can't get it now.'
At that moment Elrond came out with  Gandalf, and he called the Company
to him. 'This is my last  word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer is
setting  out on the Quest  of  Mount Doom. On him  alone is any charge laid:
neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy
nor  indeed to  let any  handle  it,  save  members of  the Company  and the
Council,  and  only then in  gravest need. The others  go  with him  as free
companions,  to help him on his way.  You may tarry,  or come back, or  turn
aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you  go, the less easy
will it be  to  withdraw; yet  no oath or bond is  laid on you to go further
than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of  your hearts, and you
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.'
`Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,' said Gimli.
'Maybe,' said Elrond, `but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has
not seen the nightfall.'
'Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,' said Gimli.
`Or  break it,' said Elrond. `Look  not too far ahead! But  go now with
good hearts!  Farewell, and may the  blessing of Elves and Men and  all Free
Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!'
'Good . . . good luck!' cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. 'I don't
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect a
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!'
Many others of Elrond's household stood in the shadows and watched them
go, bidding them farewell  with soft  voices. There was no laughter, and  no
song or music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk.
They crossed  the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths  that
led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length to the high
moor where the wind hissed through the  heather. Then with one glance at the
Last Homely House twinkling below them they strode away far into the night.
At  the  Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards went
on  by  narrow paths  among the folded lands. Their purpose was to hold this
course west of the Mountains  for many  miles and days. The country was
much
rougher  and  more barren  than  in  the  green vale of the  Great River  in
Wilderland  on the other side of the range,  and  their going would be slow;
but  they hoped  in  this way to  escape the notice of unfriendly  eyes. The
spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this empty country, and the
paths were little known except to the people of Rivendell.
Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this  land
even  in the dark.  The  others were in file behind, and  Legolas whose eyes
were keen was the rearguard.  The first  part of their  journey was hard and
dreary, and Frodo remembered little  of it, save the wind. For many  sunless
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed
able  to keep out its searching fingers.  Though the Company was  well clad,
they  seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during
the middle of  the day,  in some  hollow of the land,  or  hidden under  the
tangled  thorn-bushes  that  grew in  thickets in many places. In  the  late
afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold and
cheerless as  a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a  fire. In
the  evening  they went on again, always  as nearly  southward as they could
find a way.
At  first  it seemed  to  the hobbits  that  although  they walked  and
stumbled until  they were weary, they were creeping forward like snails, and
getting nowhere. Each  day  the land looked much the same as  it had the day
before. Yet steadily the  mountains were drawing nearer. South  of Rivendell
they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the  feet  of the  main
range there was tumbled an ever  wider land of bleak hills, and deep valleys
filled with turbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often
only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind
suddenly fell and then  veered round to  the south. The swift-flowing clouds
lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,  pale and bright. There came a
cold clear dawn  at the  end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers
reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks
seemed to have  been  built  out of the very  stone of the hills. Their dark
leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away  in the  south Frodo could  see the  dim shapes of lofty mountains
that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking. At the
left of this high  range rose three peaks; the  tallest and nearest stood up
like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still
largely  in the  shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon  it,  it glowed
red.
Gandalf stood  at Frodo's side and  looked out under his hand. `We have
done well,' he said.  `We have reached the borders of the country  that  Men
call Hollin; many Elves lived here  in happier  days,  when Eregion was  its
name.  Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we  have come,  though  many
long miles further our feet  have walked. The land and the weather  will  be
milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.'
`Dangerous or  not, a  real sunrise  is  mighty  welcome,'  said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.
'But the mountains  are ahead of us,' said Pippin. `We must have turned
eastwards in the night.'
