the middle of  the day,  in some  hollow of the land,  or  hidden under  the
tangled  thorn-bushes  that  grew in  thickets in many places. In  the  late
afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold and
cheerless as  a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a  fire. In
the  evening  they went on again, always  as nearly  southward as they could
find a way.
At  first  it seemed  to  the hobbits  that  although  they walked  and
stumbled until  they were weary, they were creeping forward like snails, and
getting nowhere. Each  day  the land looked much the same as  it had the day
before. Yet steadily the  mountains were drawing nearer. South  of Rivendell
they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the  feet  of the  main
range there was tumbled an ever  wider land of bleak hills, and deep valleys
filled with turbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often
only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind
suddenly fell and then  veered round to  the south. The swift-flowing clouds
lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,  pale and bright. There came a
cold clear dawn  at the  end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers
reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks
seemed to have  been  built  out of the very  stone of the hills. Their dark
leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away  in the  south Frodo could  see the  dim shapes of lofty mountains
that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking. At the
left of this high  range rose three peaks; the  tallest and nearest stood up
like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still
largely  in the  shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon  it,  it glowed
red.
Gandalf stood  at Frodo's side and  looked out under his hand. `We have
done well,' he said.  `We have reached the borders of the country  that  Men
call Hollin; many Elves lived here  in happier  days,  when Eregion was  its
name.  Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we  have come,  though  many
long miles further our feet  have walked. The land and the weather  will  be
milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.'
`Dangerous or  not, a  real sunrise  is  mighty  welcome,'  said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.
'But the mountains  are ahead of us,' said Pippin. `We must have turned
eastwards in the night.'
'No,'  said Gandalf. 'But you  see further ahead in  the  clear  light.
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are  many maps
in
Elrond's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?'
`Yes I did, sometimes,' said Pippin, `but I don't remember them.  Frodo
has a better head for that sort of thing.'
`I need no map,' said  Gimli, who  had come  up  with Legolas,  and was
gazing out before him with a strange  light in his deep eyes. `There is  the
land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought the image of those
mountains  into many works of metal  and of  stone, and into  many songs and
tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathyr.
`Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but I know
them and their names, for under them lies  Khazad-dym, the Dwarrowdelf, that
is  now  called  the Black Pit,  Moria in the Elvish  tongue.  Yonder stands
Barazinbar, the  Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine and
Cloudyhead: Celebdil  the  White,  and  Fanuidhol  the Grey,  that  we  call
Zirak-zigil and Bundushathyr.
`There the  Misty  Mountains  divide, and between  their  arms lies the
deep-shadowed valley  which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale,
which the Elves call Nanduhirion.'
`It is for the Dimrill Dale  that we are  making,' said Gandalf. `If we
climb  the  pass that  is called the Redhorn Gate, under  the  far  side  of
Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the
Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises  in
its icy springs.'
`Dark is  the water  of  Kheled-zvram,' said Gimli, `and  cold are  the
springs of Kibil-nvla. My  heart trembles at the thought that I may see them
soon.'
`May you have  joy of the sight, my good  dwarf  l' said  Gandalf. 'But
whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down
the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so  to the Great  River,  and then
--'
He paused.
'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry.
'To the end of the  journey -- in the  end,' said  Gandalf.  'We cannot
look too  far ahead. Let us be glad that  the first stage is safely over.  I
think we  will rest here, not only today but  tonight as  well. There  is  a
wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly
forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.'
'That is true,' said Legolas. `But  the Elves of  this land  were of  a
race strange to  us  of the  silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not
now remember them: Only I hear the stones  lament them:                    deep they delved us,
fair  they wrought  us,  high they  builded us;  but they are gone                . They are
gone. They sought the Havens long ago.'
That morning they lit a fire in a deep  hollow shrouded by great bushes
of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier than it had been since they
set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all
the  night  to sleep  in, and they  did not  mean to go  on again until  the
evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. After a while
he left the Company  and  wandered on  to the ridge; there he stood  in  the
shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and  westwards, with his head posed
as if he was listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked
down at the others laughing and talking.
`What  is the  matter, Strider?' Merry called up. 'What are you looking
for? Do you miss the East Wind?'
'No  indeed,' he answered. `But I miss  something. I  have been in  the
country  of  Hollin in many seasons. No folk  dwell here now, but many other
creatures live here at  all times, especially birds. Yet now all  things but
you are silent. I  can feel it.  There is no sound for miles about  us,  and
your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.'
Gandalf looked  up with  sudden interest. `But what do you guess is the
reason?' he asked.  `Is  there  more  in  it  than  surprise  at seeing four
hobbits, not to mention  the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen  or
heard?'
`I  hope  that  is  it,'  answered Aragorn.  `But I  have  a  sense  of
watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.'
"Then we  must be more careful,' said Gandalf.  'If you bring a  Ranger
with you, it  is well  to pay attention to  him, especially if the Ranger is
Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.'
It was Sam's turn that day  to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined
him. The others  fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even  Sam felt it.
The breathing  of  the  sleepers could be  plainly heard.  The swish  of the
pony's tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam
could hear his own joints creaking, if  he  stirred. Dead silence was around
