wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly
forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.'
'That is true,' said Legolas. `But  the Elves of  this land  were of  a
race strange to  us  of the  silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not
now remember them: Only I hear the stones  lament them:                    deep they delved us,
fair  they wrought  us,  high they  builded us;  but they are gone                . They are
gone. They sought the Havens long ago.'
That morning they lit a fire in a deep  hollow shrouded by great bushes
of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier than it had been since they
set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all
the  night  to sleep  in, and they  did not  mean to go  on again until  the
evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. After a while
he left the Company  and  wandered on  to the ridge; there he stood  in  the
shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and  westwards, with his head posed
as if he was listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked
down at the others laughing and talking.
`What  is the  matter, Strider?' Merry called up. 'What are you looking
for? Do you miss the East Wind?'
'No  indeed,' he answered. `But I miss  something. I  have been in  the
country  of  Hollin in many seasons. No folk  dwell here now, but many other
creatures live here at  all times, especially birds. Yet now all  things but
you are silent. I  can feel it.  There is no sound for miles about  us,  and
your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.'
Gandalf looked  up with  sudden interest. `But what do you guess is the
reason?' he asked.  `Is  there  more  in  it  than  surprise  at seeing four
hobbits, not to mention  the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen  or
heard?'
`I  hope  that  is  it,'  answered Aragorn.  `But I  have  a  sense  of
watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.'
"Then we  must be more careful,' said Gandalf.  'If you bring a  Ranger
with you, it  is well  to pay attention to  him, especially if the Ranger is
Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.'
It was Sam's turn that day  to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined
him. The others  fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even  Sam felt it.
The breathing  of  the  sleepers could be  plainly heard.  The swish  of the
pony's tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam
could hear his own joints creaking, if  he  stirred. Dead silence was around
him, and  over all hung a  clear blue sky, as the Sun rode up from the East.
Away  in the South  a dark patch appeared,  and grew,  and  drove north like
flying smoke in the wind.
`What's  that, Strider? It don't look  like  a  cloud,' said  Sam  in a
whisper to  Aragorn. He made no  answer, he was gazing  intently at the sky;
but  before long  Sam could see for himself what was  approaching. Flocks of
birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all
the  land as if they  were searching for  something; and they  were steadily
drawing nearer.
`Lie  flat and still!' hissed  Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade
of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from
the main host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought
they were a kind of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense
a throng that their shadow followed them  darkly over the  ground below, one
harsh croak was heard.
Not until they had  dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the
sky was again  clear  would  Aragorn rise. Then he  sprang  up and  went and
wakened Gandalf.
`Regiments of  black  crows  are  flying over all  the land between the
Mountains  and the Greyflood,'  he said, `and  they have passed over Hollin.
They are not natives here; they are          crebain    out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do
not know what they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south from
which they are  fleeing; but  I  think  they are spying out the land. I have
also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move
again this  evening.  Hollin is no  longer wholesome  for  us: it  is  being
watched.'
`And in that case so is the Redhorn  Gate,' said Gandalf;  `and how  we
can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of
that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you
are right.'
`Luckily our fire made  little smoke,  and  had  burned  low before the
crebain    came,' said Aragorn. `It must be put out and not lit again.'
`Well if that isn't a plague and a nuisance!' said Pippin. The news: no
fire, and a move again  by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke
in the late afternoon. 'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward
to a real good meal tonight: something hot.'
`Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. `There may be many
unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in
comfort,  and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate:
it will get warmer as we get south.'
'Too  warm, I  shouldn't  wonder,'  muttered  Sam  to  Frodo. 'But  I'm
beginning to think it's time we got  a sight of that Fiery Mountain  and saw
the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn,
or  whatever its  name is, might  be it, till Gimli spoke his piece.  A fair
jaw-cracker dwarf-language  must be!' Maps  conveyed nothing  to Sam's mind,
and all  distances in  these strange lands  seemed so vast that he was quite
out of his reckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds passed over
now  and  again;  but  as  the  westering  Sun  grew  red  they  disappeared
southwards. At dusk  the  Company set out, and  turning  now half  east they
steered their course towards  Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly
red  in the last  light of the vanished Sun. One  by one  white stars sprang
forth as the sky faded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo  like the
remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and  well planned, from
Hollin to the  mountain-pass.  The  Moon, now  at the  full,  rose  over the
mountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were  black.
Many  of  them looked  to  have been worked by hands, though  now  they  lay
tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land.
It  was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon
was low. Frodo looked  up at the sky. Suddenly  he saw or felt a shadow pass
over the high  stars, as  if for a  moment they faded  and  then flashed out
again. He shivered.
`Did you see anything pass over?' he whispered to Gandalf, who was just
ahead.
`No, but I felt it, whatever  it was,' he answered. `It may be nothing,
only a wisp of thin cloud.'
`It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, `and not with the wind.'
Nothing  further  happened  that  night.  The next morning  dawned even
brighter  than  before.  But the air was chill  again; already  the wind was
turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing
steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the
mountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose
before  them, a mighty peak, tipped with  snow  like silver, but with  sheer
