unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in
comfort,  and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate:
it will get warmer as we get south.'
'Too  warm, I  shouldn't  wonder,'  muttered  Sam  to  Frodo. 'But  I'm
beginning to think it's time we got  a sight of that Fiery Mountain  and saw
the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn,
or  whatever its  name is, might  be it, till Gimli spoke his piece.  A fair
jaw-cracker dwarf-language  must be!' Maps  conveyed nothing  to Sam's mind,
and all  distances in  these strange lands  seemed so vast that he was quite
out of his reckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds passed over
now  and  again;  but  as  the  westering  Sun  grew  red  they  disappeared
southwards. At dusk  the  Company set out, and  turning  now half  east they
steered their course towards  Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly
red  in the last  light of the vanished Sun. One  by one  white stars sprang
forth as the sky faded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo  like the
remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and  well planned, from
Hollin to the  mountain-pass.  The  Moon, now  at the  full,  rose  over the
mountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were  black.
Many  of  them looked  to  have been worked by hands, though  now  they  lay
tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land.
It  was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon
was low. Frodo looked  up at the sky. Suddenly  he saw or felt a shadow pass
over the high  stars, as  if for a  moment they faded  and  then flashed out
again. He shivered.
`Did you see anything pass over?' he whispered to Gandalf, who was just
ahead.
`No, but I felt it, whatever  it was,' he answered. `It may be nothing,
only a wisp of thin cloud.'
`It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, `and not with the wind.'
Nothing  further  happened  that  night.  The next morning  dawned even
brighter  than  before.  But the air was chill  again; already  the wind was
turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing
steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the
mountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose
before  them, a mighty peak, tipped with  snow  like silver, but with  sheer
naked sides, dull red as if stained with blood.
There was a  black look in the sky, and  the sun was wan. The  wind had
gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked back.
`Winter deepens behind us,' he said quietly to  Aragorn.  'The  heights
away  north  are whiter  than  they  were;  snow  is  lying far  down  their
shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up  towards the Redhorn Gate.
We  may well be seen  by watchers  on that narrow path,  and waylaid by some
evil;  but the weather may prove a  more deadly enemy than any. What  do you
think of your course now, Aragorn?'
Frodo overheard  these  words, and understood that  Gandalf and Aragorn
were  continuing  some  debate  that  had  begun  long before.  He  listened
anxiously.
'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well,
Gandalf,' answered Aragorn. `And perils known and unknown will grow as we
go
on. But we must  go on; and it is no good our  delaying  the passage  of the
mountains. Further south  there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap  of
Rohan.  I do not trust  that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows
which
side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?'
'Who knows indeed!' said Gandalf. `But there is another way, and not by
the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.'
'But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others I
beg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.'
'We must decide before we go further,' answered Gandalf.
'Then let us weigh  the matter in our  minds, while the others rest and
sleep,' said Aragorn.
In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast,
Gandalf and Aragorn  went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its
sides  were now dark  and sullen, and  its head  was in  grey  cloud.  Frodo
watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned
to
the Company Gandalf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face
the weather and the high  pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was
the other dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned.
`From signs that we have  seen lately,' said Gandalf,  'I fear that the
Redhorn Gate may be  watched; and also  I have doubts of the weather that is
coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go  with all the speed that we
can.
Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the
pass.  Dark will come early this evening. We must leave  as  soon as you can
get ready.'
'I will  add a  word of  advice, if I  may,'  said Boromir. 'I was born
under the shadow of the White Mountains and  know  something of journeys
in
the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down
on the other side. It will not help  us to keep so secret that we are frozen
to death. When we leave here, where  there are still a few trees and bushes,
each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.'
'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't  you lad?' said Sam. The pony
looked at him mournfully.
'Very well,' said Gandalf. `But we must not  use the wood -- not unless
it is a choice between fire and death.'
The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their  way
became steep  and  difficult.  The twisting  and climbing road  had  in many
places almost disappeared, and was  blocked  with  many fallen  stones.  The
night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A  bitter wind swirled among  the
rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains. The
narrow path now wound  under a sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which
the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a  sharp slope and halted for a  moment at the
top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm and saw the dim
white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve.
They went on. But before  long the snow was falling fast,  filling  all
the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and
Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.
'I don't like this at all,' panted Sam  just behind.  'Snow's all right
on a fine morning,  but I like to be in  bed while it's falling. I wish this
lot would  go off to Hobbiton! Folk might  welcome  it there.' Except on the
high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire,  and was
regarded as  a pleasant event and  a chance for fun. No  living hobbit (save
