Redhorn Gate may be  watched; and also  I have doubts of the weather that is
coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go  with all the speed that we
can.
Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the
pass.  Dark will come early this evening. We must leave  as  soon as you can
get ready.'
'I will  add a  word of  advice, if I  may,'  said Boromir. 'I was born
under the shadow of the White Mountains and  know  something of journeys
in
the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down
on the other side. It will not help  us to keep so secret that we are frozen
to death. When we leave here, where  there are still a few trees and bushes,
each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.'
'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't  you lad?' said Sam. The pony
looked at him mournfully.
'Very well,' said Gandalf. `But we must not  use the wood -- not unless
it is a choice between fire and death.'
The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their  way
became steep  and  difficult.  The twisting  and climbing road  had  in many
places almost disappeared, and was  blocked  with  many fallen  stones.  The
night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A  bitter wind swirled among  the
rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains. The
narrow path now wound  under a sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which
the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a  sharp slope and halted for a  moment at the
top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm and saw the dim
white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve.
They went on. But before  long the snow was falling fast,  filling  all
the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and
Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.
'I don't like this at all,' panted Sam  just behind.  'Snow's all right
on a fine morning,  but I like to be in  bed while it's falling. I wish this
lot would  go off to Hobbiton! Folk might  welcome  it there.' Except on the
high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire,  and was
regarded as  a pleasant event and  a chance for fun. No  living hobbit (save
Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311, when the white wolves
invaded
the Shire over the frozen Brandywine.
Gandalf  halted. Snow  was  thick on  his  hood and  shoulders;  it was
already ankle-deep about his boots.
"This is what I feared,' he said. `What do you say now, Aragorn?'
'That I feared  it too,' Aragorn answered, `but less than other things.
I knew the  risk of  snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save
high up in the mountains. But we are not  high yet;  we are still  far down,
where the paths are usually open all the winter.'
'I wonder if this  is a contrivance  of the Enemy,' said Boromir. "They
say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that
stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.'
'His arm  has grown long indeed,' said Gimli, `if he can draw snow down
from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.'
'His arm has grown long,' said Gandalf.
While  they  were halted,  the wind died  down, and the snow  slackened
until  it almost ceased. They tramped on again.  But they had not  gone more
than a  furlong when the storm returned with fresh  fury. The  wind whistled
and  the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found it hard to
keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind  the taller
folk, but it was  plain  that they could not  go much  further,  if the snow
continued.  Frodo's  feet felt like lead. Pippin  was dragging behind.  Even
Gimli, as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.
The Company  halted  suddenly, as if  they  had  come  to  an agreement
without any words  being  spoken. They  heard eerie noises in  the  darkness
round them.  It may have been only a  trick of  the wind in  the cracks  and
gullies  of the  rocky wall, but the sounds were those of shrill  cries, and
wild  howls  of  laughter.  Stones  began  to  fall  from the mountain-side,
whistling over  their heads, or crashing on the path beside them. Every  now
and  again they heard a dull  rumble,  as a great  boulder rolled  down from
hidden heights above.
`We cannot go further  tonight,' said Boromir. `Let those  call it  the
wind who will; there are fell voices on the  air; and these stones are aimed
at us.'
`I do call it the wind,' said Aragorn. `But that does not make what you
say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have
little  love for those that go on two legs, and  yet are not in  league with
Sauron, but have purposes of  their own. Some have been in this world longer
than he.'
'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, `long
years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.'
`It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off  his attack;
said Gandalf.
'But what can we do?'  cried Pippin miserably. He  was leaning on Merry
and Frodo, and he was shivering.
`Either stop where we are, or  go back,' said Gandalf.  'It is no  good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly,  this path leaves the
cliff  and  runs into  a wide  shallow trough at the bottom of a  long  hard
slope. We should  have no shelter there  from snow, or stones -- or anything
else.'
`And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. `We
have  passed  no place on the way up that  offered  more  shelter  than this
cliff-wall we are under now.'
`Shelter!' muttered Sam. `If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof
make a house.'
The Company now gathered together  as close to the cliff as they could.
It faced  southwards, and near the bottom it leaned  out  a little, so  that
they hoped it would give  them some protection  from  the northerly wind and
from the falling  stones. But eddying blasts swirled  round them from  every
side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony stood
patiently but dejectedly in  front  of  the  hobbits,  and  screened  them a
little; but before long the  drifting snow was above his  hocks, and it went
on mounting. If they had had no  larger companions the  hobbits  would  soon
have been entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes,  and out of the
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice  speaking                    .  I
don't think much of your diary         , he  said.  Snowstorms on January the twelfth:
there was no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo        , Frodo answered with an effort, when
he  felt  himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir
had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
