little  love for those that go on two legs, and  yet are not in  league with
Sauron, but have purposes of  their own. Some have been in this world longer
than he.'
'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, `long
years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.'
`It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off  his attack;
said Gandalf.
'But what can we do?'  cried Pippin miserably. He  was leaning on Merry
and Frodo, and he was shivering.
`Either stop where we are, or  go back,' said Gandalf.  'It is no  good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly,  this path leaves the
cliff  and  runs into  a wide  shallow trough at the bottom of a  long  hard
slope. We should  have no shelter there  from snow, or stones -- or anything
else.'
`And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. `We
have  passed  no place on the way up that  offered  more  shelter  than this
cliff-wall we are under now.'
`Shelter!' muttered Sam. `If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof
make a house.'
The Company now gathered together  as close to the cliff as they could.
It faced  southwards, and near the bottom it leaned  out  a little, so  that
they hoped it would give  them some protection  from  the northerly wind and
from the falling  stones. But eddying blasts swirled  round them from  every
side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony stood
patiently but dejectedly in  front  of  the  hobbits,  and  screened  them a
little; but before long the  drifting snow was above his  hocks, and it went
on mounting. If they had had no  larger companions the  hobbits  would  soon
have been entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes,  and out of the
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice  speaking                    .  I
don't think much of your diary         , he  said.  Snowstorms on January the twelfth:
there was no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo        , Frodo answered with an effort, when
he  felt  himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir
had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
`This will be the death  of the halflings, Gandalf,'  said Boromir. `It
is useless  to sit  here until the  snow goes  over  our heads.  We must  do
something to save ourselves.'
`Give them this,' said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a
leathern flask. `Just a mouthful each -- for all of us. It is very precious.
It is  miruvor  , the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting.
Pass it round!'
As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquor
he felt a new strength of heart, and the  heavy drowsiness  left  his limbs.
The  others also  revived and found fresh hope and vigour. But the snow  did
not  relent. It whirled about  them thicker  than  ever, and the  wind  blew
louder.
'What do  you say to fire?' asked Boromir  suddenly. 'The  choice seems
near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden  from
all unfriendly eyes when the  snow has covered us,  but that  will not  help
us.'
'You may make a fire,  if you can,' answered Gandalf. 'If there are any
watchers that can endure this storm, then they  can see us, fire or no.' But
though they had  brought wood and kindlings by  the  advice  of Boromir,  it
passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid
the swirling wind or catch  in  the  wet fuel.  At  last reluctantly Gandalf
himself took a hand. Picking  up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and
then with a word of command           , naur an edraith ammen!          he thrust the end of his
staff into  the midst of it.  At once a great spout  of green and blue flame
sprang out, and the wood flared and sputtered.
`If there  are any  to  see, then I at  least am revealed to  them,' he
said. 'I have  written     Gandalf  is  here      in signs  that all  can  read from
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.'
But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly  eyes. Their
hearts were rejoiced to see  the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily;
and though  all round it  the  snow  hissed, and pools of  slush crept under
their feet, they warmed  their hands gladly at the  blaze. There they stood,
stooping  in  a circle round the little  dancing and  blowing flames. A  red
light was on their tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a
black wall.
But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.
The fire burned low. and the last faggot was thrown on.
The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. "The dawn is not far off.'
`If any dawn can pierce these clouds,' said Gimli.
Boromir  stepped  out of the  circle and stared up into  the blackness.
'The snow is growing less,' he said, `and the wind is quieter.'
Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes  still  falling out of the dark to be
revealed white  for a moment in the light of the dying fire;  but for a long
time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,  as sleep  was
beginning to creep over him again, he  was aware that  the  wind had  indeed
fallen,  and the flakes were  becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly  a  dim
light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether.
As the  light grew stronger  it showed  a silent shrouded world.  Below
their refuge  were white  humps and domes and shapeless deeps beneath  which
the path  that they had trodden was  altogether lost;  but the heights above
were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. `Caradhras has not forgiven us.' he
said.  `He has more snow yet to fling at  us, if we go on.  The sooner we go
back and down the better.'
To this all agreed, but their retreat  was now difficult. It might well
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their fire the snow lay
many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in places it  had been
scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff.
`If  Gandalf  would go before us with  a bright  flame, he might melt a
path for you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone
of the Company remained still light of heart.
`If Elves could fly over mountains, they  might fetch  the Sun  to save
us,' answered Gandalf. `But I must have something to work on.  I cannot burn
snow.'
`Well,' said Boromir, `when heads are  at a  loss bodies must serve, as
we say in my  country. The strongest of us must seek a  way. See! Though all
is  now snow-clad,  our path, as  we came up, turned about that shoulder  of
rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we
could  reach that point, maybe it would prove easier  beyond. It  is no more
than a furlong off, I guess.'
`Then let us force a path thither, you and I!' said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the  tallest of the  Company, but  Boromir, little less  in
height, was  broader and heavier  in  build.  He led  the  way,  and Aragorn
followed  him.  Slowly  they  moved off, and were soon  toiling heavily.  In
