The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. "The dawn is not far off.'
`If any dawn can pierce these clouds,' said Gimli.
Boromir  stepped  out of the  circle and stared up into  the blackness.
'The snow is growing less,' he said, `and the wind is quieter.'
Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes  still  falling out of the dark to be
revealed white  for a moment in the light of the dying fire;  but for a long
time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,  as sleep  was
beginning to creep over him again, he  was aware that  the  wind had  indeed
fallen,  and the flakes were  becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly  a  dim
light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether.
As the  light grew stronger  it showed  a silent shrouded world.  Below
their refuge  were white  humps and domes and shapeless deeps beneath  which
the path  that they had trodden was  altogether lost;  but the heights above
were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. `Caradhras has not forgiven us.' he
said.  `He has more snow yet to fling at  us, if we go on.  The sooner we go
back and down the better.'
To this all agreed, but their retreat  was now difficult. It might well
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their fire the snow lay
many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in places it  had been
scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff.
`If  Gandalf  would go before us with  a bright  flame, he might melt a
path for you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone
of the Company remained still light of heart.
`If Elves could fly over mountains, they  might fetch  the Sun  to save
us,' answered Gandalf. `But I must have something to work on.  I cannot burn
snow.'
`Well,' said Boromir, `when heads are  at a  loss bodies must serve, as
we say in my  country. The strongest of us must seek a  way. See! Though all
is  now snow-clad,  our path, as  we came up, turned about that shoulder  of
rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we
could  reach that point, maybe it would prove easier  beyond. It  is no more
than a furlong off, I guess.'
`Then let us force a path thither, you and I!' said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the  tallest of the  Company, but  Boromir, little less  in
height, was  broader and heavier  in  build.  He led  the  way,  and Aragorn
followed  him.  Slowly  they  moved off, and were soon  toiling heavily.  In
places the snow was breast-high, and often Boromir  seemed to bc swimming
or
burrowing with his great arms rather than walking.
Legolas watched  them for a while with a smile upon his lips,  and then
he turned to the others. `The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say:
let a ploughman plough,  but choose an otter for swimming, and  for  running
light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.'
With that he sprang forth nimbly, and  then Frodo noticed as if for the
first time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no boots, but wore
only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imprint  in the
snow.
'Farewell!' he said to Gandalf. `I go to find the Sun!' Then swift as a
runner over  firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the toiling men,
with a  wave of his hand he passed them,  and  sped into  the  distance, and
vanished round the rocky turn.
The others  waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragorn
dwindled into black specks  in the whiteness. At length they too passed from
sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snow
came curling down again.
An hour, maybe,  went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at last
they  saw  Legolas  coming  back.  At  the  same time  Boromir  and  Aragorn
reappeared round the bend far behind him and came labouring up the slope.
`Well,' cried Legolas as he ran up, `I have not brought the Sun. She is
walking in the blue fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on this
Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam  of
good hope for  those who are doomed  to  go on feet. There  is  the greatest
wind-drift of all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were almost
buried. They despaired, until I  returned and told them  that the  drift was
little wider  than  a wall. And on  the  other  side the snow suddenly grows
less,  while further down  it  is no  more than  a white coverlet  to cool a
hobbit's toes.'
`Ah, it is as I  said,' growled Gimli. 'It was no ordinary storm. It is
the  ill  will of Caradhras. He  does not love Elves and  Dwarves, and  that
drift was laid to cut off our escape.'
'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you  have Men with you,'
said Boromir, who came up at that moment. `And doughty Men too, if I may
say
it; though lesser  men with spades might have served you  better.  Still, we
have thrust a lane through the  drift; and for that all here may be grateful
who cannot run as light as Elves.'
`But  how are we  to get down there, even  if  you have cut through the
drift?' said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.
'Have  hope!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strength
left, and  Aragorn too. We  will  bear the  little folk. The others no doubt
will make shift  to tread the path behind  us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will
begin with you.'
He lifted  up  the hobbit. 'Cling to  my back! I shall need my arms' he
said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin marvelled at
his  strength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with  no  other
tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the
track for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as he went.
They  came  at length  to  the  great drift.  It  was  flung across the
mountain-path like a  sheer  and sudden  wall, and  its  crest, sharp as  if
shaped with  knives,  reared up more than twice the  height of  Boromir; but
through the middle  a passage had been  beaten, rising  and falling  like  a
bridge.  On  the  far  side Merry  and Pippin were set down, and there  they
waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive.
After a  while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in  the narrow but
now well-trodden track came Gandalf,  leading  Bill with Gimli perched among
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane;
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled
down a fall of stones and slithering  snow. The spray of it half blinded the
Company as they crouched against the cliff,  and  when the air cleared again
they saw that the path was blocked behind them.
`Enough, enough!' cried Gimli. 'We are departing as quickly as we may!'
And  indeed with that  last stroke the malice  of  the mountain seemed to be
expended, as if Caradhras was  satisfied  that the invaders had been  beaten
off  and  would not  dare to  return. The threat of snow lifted; the  clouds
began to break and the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow  became steadily more
shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon
they  all stood once more on the  flat shelf at the head of the steep  slope
where they had felt the first flakes of snow the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From  the high place they looked back
