it; though lesser  men with spades might have served you  better.  Still, we
have thrust a lane through the  drift; and for that all here may be grateful
who cannot run as light as Elves.'
`But  how are we  to get down there, even  if  you have cut through the
drift?' said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.
'Have  hope!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strength
left, and  Aragorn too. We  will  bear the  little folk. The others no doubt
will make shift  to tread the path behind  us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will
begin with you.'
He lifted  up  the hobbit. 'Cling to  my back! I shall need my arms' he
said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin marvelled at
his  strength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with  no  other
tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the
track for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as he went.
They  came  at length  to  the  great drift.  It  was  flung across the
mountain-path like a  sheer  and sudden  wall, and  its  crest, sharp as  if
shaped with  knives,  reared up more than twice the  height of  Boromir; but
through the middle  a passage had been  beaten, rising  and falling  like  a
bridge.  On  the  far  side Merry  and Pippin were set down, and there  they
waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive.
After a  while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in  the narrow but
now well-trodden track came Gandalf,  leading  Bill with Gimli perched among
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane;
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled
down a fall of stones and slithering  snow. The spray of it half blinded the
Company as they crouched against the cliff,  and  when the air cleared again
they saw that the path was blocked behind them.
`Enough, enough!' cried Gimli. 'We are departing as quickly as we may!'
And  indeed with that  last stroke the malice  of  the mountain seemed to be
expended, as if Caradhras was  satisfied  that the invaders had been  beaten
off  and  would not  dare to  return. The threat of snow lifted; the  clouds
began to break and the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow  became steadily more
shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon
they  all stood once more on the  flat shelf at the head of the steep  slope
where they had felt the first flakes of snow the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From  the high place they looked back
westwards over the lower lands.  Far away in the tumble of country  that lay
at the foot of the  mountain  was  the  dell  from which they had started to
climb the pass.
Frodo's legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head
was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march downhill. Black specks
swam  before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the
distance below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots were
circling in the air.
`The birds again!' said Aragorn, pointing down.
'That cannot be helped  now,' said Gandalf.  `Whether they are good  or
evil,  or have nothing to do with us at  all, we must go  down at  once. Not
even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!'
A cold  wind flowed down behind them, as they turned their backs on the
Redhorn Gate,  and stumbled  wearily down the  slope. Caradhras had defeated
them.
Chapter 4. A Journey in the Dark
It was  evening, and the  grey light  was again  waning fast, when they
halted  for the night. They were very  weary.  The mountains were veiled  in
deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more
mouthful
each of the miruvor  of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called a
council.
'We cannot, of  course, go on again  tonight,' he said. `The attack  on
the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.'
`And then where are we to go? ' asked Frodo.
'We still have our journey and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf.
`We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.'
Pippin's  face brightened visibly at the  mere  mention  of  return  to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked  up hopefully. But Aragorn  and Boromir
made
no sign. Frodo looked troubled.
`I wish I was back there,' he said. `But how can I return without shame
-- unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? '
`You  are right, Frodo,'  said Gandalf:  `to go back is to admit defeat
and face worse defeat to come. If we go  back now, then the Ring must remain
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell
will be  besieged,  and after a  brief and bitter time it will be destroyed.
The  Ringwraiths  are deadly  enemies, but they are only shadows  yet of the
power and terror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's
hand again.'
'Then  we must  go on, if there is a way,' said  Frodo with a sigh. Sam
sank back into gloom.
`There is a way that we may attempt,' said Gandalf. `I thought from the
beginning, when  first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But
it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before.
Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had  at least been
tried.'
`If  it  is a worse road  than the  Redhorn Gate,  then it must be evil
