Chapter 4. A Journey in the Dark
It was  evening, and the  grey light  was again  waning fast, when they
halted  for the night. They were very  weary.  The mountains were veiled  in
deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more
mouthful
each of the miruvor  of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called a
council.
'We cannot, of  course, go on again  tonight,' he said. `The attack  on
the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.'
`And then where are we to go? ' asked Frodo.
'We still have our journey and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf.
`We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.'
Pippin's  face brightened visibly at the  mere  mention  of  return  to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked  up hopefully. But Aragorn  and Boromir
made
no sign. Frodo looked troubled.
`I wish I was back there,' he said. `But how can I return without shame
-- unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? '
`You  are right, Frodo,'  said Gandalf:  `to go back is to admit defeat
and face worse defeat to come. If we go  back now, then the Ring must remain
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell
will be  besieged,  and after a  brief and bitter time it will be destroyed.
The  Ringwraiths  are deadly  enemies, but they are only shadows  yet of the
power and terror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's
hand again.'
'Then  we must  go on, if there is a way,' said  Frodo with a sigh. Sam
sank back into gloom.
`There is a way that we may attempt,' said Gandalf. `I thought from the
beginning, when  first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But
it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before.
Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had  at least been
tried.'
`If  it  is a worse road  than the  Redhorn Gate,  then it must be evil
indeed,' said Merry. `But you had better tell us about it, and  let  us know
the worst at once.'
'The road  that I speak  of leads to the Mines of Moria,' said Gandalf.
Only  Gimli lifted  up his head; a smouldering fire  was in his eyes. On all
the others a dread fell at  the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it
was a legend of vague fear:
`The road  may lead  to Moria,  but how can  we  hope that it will lead
through Moria? ' said Aragorn darkly.
`It  is a name of ill omen,' said Boromir. `Nor do I see the need to go
there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we
come  to the Gap of Rohan, where men  are friendly to  my people, taking the
road that  I followed on my way  hither. Or we might  pass by  and cross the
Isen into Langstrand and  Lebennin,  and so come to Gondor from the  regions
nigh to the sea.'
'Things have changed since you came  north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf.
'Did you not hear what I  told you  of Saruman? With him I may have business
of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that
can by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed to  us while we go
with the Bearer.
'As  for the longer road:  we cannot  afford the time. We might spend a
year in such a journey, and we should pass through many lands that are empty
and  harbourless.  Yet  they would not  be safe. The watchful  eyes  both of
Saruman and of the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir, you
were
in the  Enemy's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter  of
small concern to  him: his  mind was busy with the pursuit of the  Ring. But
you return now as  a member of the Ring's  Company, and you  are in peril as
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase  with every league that
we go south under the naked sky.
`Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has become more
desperate, I  fear. I  see now little  hope, if  we  do not soon vanish from
sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go
neither over the mountains, nor round them, but  under them. That  is a road
at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us to take.'
`We do not  know what  he expects,' said  Boromir. `He  may  watch  all
roads, likely and  unlikely. In  that case to enter  Moria would  be to walk
into  a  trap, hardly better than knocking at  the  gates of  the Dark Tower
itself. The name of Moria is black.'
`You speak  of  what  you do not  know,  when you  liken  Moria to  the
stronghold of Sauron,' answered Gandalf.  `I alone of you  have ever been in
the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in  his older and lesser dwelling in
Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I would
not lead you into Moria if there  were no hope of coming out again. If there
are Orcs there,  it may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs
of the Misty Mountains were  scattered or  destroyed  in the Battle  of Five
Armies. The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hope that Moria is still free.
`There is  even a chance that Dwarves are  there, and that in some deep
hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may prove,
one must tread the path that need chooses!'
'I will tread the  path with you, Gandalf! ' said Gimli. 'I will go and
look on  the halls of Durin, whatever may  wait  there-if  you can  find the
doors that are shut.'
'Good,  Gimli!  '  said  Gandalf.  `You encourage me. We  will seek the
hidden  doors together.  And  we will come  through.  In  the  ruins of  the
Dwarves, a dwarf's head  will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men  or
Hobbits. Yet it  will not  be the first time  that  I have been to  Moria. I
sought  there long for Thrbin son of  Thrur  after  he  was  lost.  I passed
through, and I came out again alive! '
`I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though
I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria
a second time.'
'And I don't wish to enter it even once,' said Pippin.
'Nor me,' muttered Sam.
`Of course not!  ' said Gandalf.  'Who would? But  the question is: who
will follow me, if I lead you there? '
'I will,' said Gimli eagerly.
'I  will,' said  Aragorn  heavily.  `You  followed  my  lead almost  to
disaster in  the  snow, and have said no  word of  blame. I will follow your
lead  now -- if this last warning does not move you. It is  not of the Ring,
nor of  us others that  I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to
you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware! '
`I  will  not  go,' said Boromir;  'not  unless  the vote  of  the  whole
company  is  against me.  What  do  Legolas and  the  little  folk  say? The
