whiter  than it  had  been  then,  and his  beard  and eyebrows were perhaps
longer, and  his face more lined with care and  wisdom; but his eyes were as
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with the same vigour  and
delight.
He was  smoking  now in  silence, for  Frodo was sitting still, deep in
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.
'Last  night  you  began to  tell  me  strange  things  about  my ring,
Gandalf,' he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters
were best left until  daylight. Don't you think  you  had better finish now?
You  say the ring  is dangerous,  far more  dangerous than  I guess. In what
way?'
'In many  ways,' answered  the wizard. It is far  more powerful than  I
ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the  end it  would utterly
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him.
'In Eregion long  ago many Elven-rings  were made,  magic  rings as you
call them, and they were, of course, of various  kinds: some more potent and
some  less.  The lesser rings were only essays  in the craft before  it  was
full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but  trifles - yet still to my
mind dangerous for mortals. But  the Great Rings,  the Rings of Power,  they
were perilous.
'A  mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great  Rings, does not die, but
he does not  grow  or obtain more life, he merely continues, until  at  last
every minute is a weariness. And if he often  uses the Ring  to make himself
invisible,  he   fades:   he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks
in the twilight under the eye of the  dark power that rules the Rings.  Yes,
sooner or  later - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but
neither strength nor good purpose will last - sooner or later the dark power
will devour him.'
'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.
'How long have you  known this?'  asked Frodo  at length. 'And how much
did Bilbo know?'
'Bilbo knew no  more than he told you, I  am  sure,' said Gandalf.  'He
would certainly never have  passed on  to you anything that he thought would
be a danger, even though I  promised to  look after you. He thought the ring
was very beautiful, and very  useful at  need;  and if anything was wrong or
queer, it was himself. He said that it was "growing on his mind", and he was
always worrying about it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to
blame.  Though he had found out that  the thing needed looking after; it did
not seem always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded  in an odd
way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.'
'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo,  'so I have
always kept it on its chain.'
'Very wise,'  said Gandalf.  'But  as for  his long life,  Bilbo  never
connected  it  with the  ring  at all. He took  all  the credit  for that to
himself,  and he was very  proud of  it. Though  he was getting restless and
uneasy.    Thin and  stretched        he  said. A  sign  that  the  ring was getting
control.'
'How long have you known all this?' asked Frodo again.
'Known?'  said  Gandalf.  'I  have known  much that only the Wise know,
Frodo. But  if you mean "known about              this  ring", well,  I still do not    know,
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.
'When did I first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back  in memory.
'Let me see - it was in the year that the White Council drove the dark power
from Mirkwood,  just before the Battle of Five  Armies, that Bilbo found his
ring.  A  shadow  fell on my  heart then, though  I did not know  yet what I
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came  by a Great Ring, as plainly it was
- that at least was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo's strange story
of how he had "won" it, and I  could not believe it. When I at last  got the
truth out of him,  I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to
the  ring beyond  doubt. Much like Gollum  with his "birthday  present". The
lies were too much alike for my comfort. Clearly the ring had an unwholesome
power  that  set to  work on  its keeper at once.  That was the  first  real
warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. There was little
else that I could  do.  I could not take it  from him without doing  greater
harm; and  I had no right to  do so anyway. I could only watch  and wait.  I
might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held
me
back.'
'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.'
'Maybe  not,' answered Gandalf. 'Hobbits  are, or were,  no concern  of
his. Yet he is great among the Wise.  He  is the  chief of  my order and the
head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it,
and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small,
is  his province. He  has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their
making; but when the  Rings  were debated  in the Council, all that he would
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept - but
uneasily. Still I watched and I waited.
'And all  seemed well  with  Bilbo. And  the  years  passed. Yes,  they
passed, and  they seemed  not to touch him.  He showed no signs of age.  The
shadow fell  on me  again. But I said  to  myself: "After all he comes of  a
long-lived family on his mother's side. There is time yet. Wait!"
'And  I waited.  Until  that night when he left this house. He said and
did things then that  filled me with a  fear that no words  of Saruman could
allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. And I have
spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.'
'There  wasn't  any  permanent  harm  done,  was  there?'  asked  Frodo
anxiously. 'He would  get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in
peace, I mean?'
'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power in
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I
know there is no Power  in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the
Wise I  am  the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch  of
knowledge, but  full  of surprises.  Soft as  butter  they  can be,  and yet
sometimes as tough as old  tree-roots.  I  think it likely  that  some would
resist the  Rings far longer  than most of the Wise  would believe.  I don't
think you need worry about Bilbo.
'Of  course, he possessed the ring  for many years,  and used it, so it
might take a long while for the  influence to  wear off - before it was safe
for him to see it  again, for  instance.  Otherwise,  he might  live on  for
years,  quite happily: just stop  as  he was when he parted with  it. For he
gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I  was  not
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the  thing go. It is for
you   that I feel responsible.
'Ever  since  Bilbo left  I have been deeply concerned  about you,  and
about all  these charming, absurd, helpless  hobbits. It would be a grievous
blow to the world, if  the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all  your kind,
jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not
to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.'
