itself. The name of Moria is black.'
`You speak  of  what  you do not  know,  when you  liken  Moria to  the
stronghold of Sauron,' answered Gandalf.  `I alone of you  have ever been in
the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in  his older and lesser dwelling in
Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I would
not lead you into Moria if there  were no hope of coming out again. If there
are Orcs there,  it may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs
of the Misty Mountains were  scattered or  destroyed  in the Battle  of Five
Armies. The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hope that Moria is still free.
`There is  even a chance that Dwarves are  there, and that in some deep
hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may prove,
one must tread the path that need chooses!'
'I will tread the  path with you, Gandalf! ' said Gimli. 'I will go and
look on  the halls of Durin, whatever may  wait  there-if  you can  find the
doors that are shut.'
'Good,  Gimli!  '  said  Gandalf.  `You encourage me. We  will seek the
hidden  doors together.  And  we will come  through.  In  the  ruins of  the
Dwarves, a dwarf's head  will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men  or
Hobbits. Yet it  will not  be the first time  that  I have been to  Moria. I
sought  there long for Thrbin son of  Thrur  after  he  was  lost.  I passed
through, and I came out again alive! '
`I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though
I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria
a second time.'
'And I don't wish to enter it even once,' said Pippin.
'Nor me,' muttered Sam.
`Of course not!  ' said Gandalf.  'Who would? But  the question is: who
will follow me, if I lead you there? '
'I will,' said Gimli eagerly.
'I  will,' said  Aragorn  heavily.  `You  followed  my  lead almost  to
disaster in  the  snow, and have said no  word of  blame. I will follow your
lead  now -- if this last warning does not move you. It is  not of the Ring,
nor of  us others that  I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to
you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware! '
`I  will  not  go,' said Boromir;  'not  unless  the vote  of  the  whole
company  is  against me.  What  do  Legolas and  the  little  folk  say? The
Ring-bearer's voice surely should be heard? '
'I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas.
The  hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. `I
do  not wish to go,' he said; `but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of
Gandalf. I  beg that there should be  no vote,  until we  have slept on  it.
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this  cold
gloom. How the wind howls! '
At  these  words  all fell  into silent thought. They  heard  the  wind
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and wailing round
them in the empty spaces of the night.
Suddenly  Aragorn leapt to  his feet. 'How the wind howls! '  he cried.
'It is howling with wolf-voices. The  Wargs have come west of the Mountains!
'
'Need we wait until morning then? ' said Gandalf. `It is as I said. The
hunt  is  up! Even if  we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey
south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? '
'How far is Moria? ' asked Boromir.
`There was a door south-west  of Caradhras,  some  fifteen miles as the
crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,' answered Gandalf grimly.
'Then let  us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if  we can,'  said
Boromir. 'The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.'
`True!' said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. `But where the
warg howls, there also the orc prowls.'
`I  wish I had taken Elrond's advice,' muttered Pippin to Sam. `I am no
good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer
in  me:  these  howls  freeze my  blood.  I  don't ever  remember feeling so
wretched.'
'My heart's  right  down  in my  toes, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam.  'But  we
aren't etten yet,  and there are some stout folk here with  us. Whatever may
be in store for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolf's belly.'
For their defence in the  night the Company  climbed to the  top of the
small hill under which they had been sheltering. it was crowned  with a knot
of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder stones.
In the midst of  this they lit a fire,  for there was  no hope that darkness
and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.
Round the  fire  they  sat,  and those  that  were  not on  guard dozed
uneasily.  Poor  Bill the  pony  trembled  and sweated where he  stood.  The
howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer and
sometimes
further off.  In the dead  of the night many shining eyes were  seen peering
over the brow of the  hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a
gap  in the circle a great  dark wolf-shape  could be seen halted, gazing at
them.  A shuddering howl  broke from him, as if he  were a captain summoning
his pack to the assault.
Gandalf stood  up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. 'Listen,
Hound of Sauron! ' he cried. `Gandalf is here.  Fly, if you value  your foul
skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.'
The wolf snarled and  sprang towards  them  with a great leap.  At that
moment  there was a sharp twang. Legolas  had  loosed his bow.  There  was a
hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to  the ground; the elvish arrow
had  pierced  its  throat. The  watching  eyes were  suddenly  extinguished.
Gandalf  and  Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting
packs had fled. All about them  the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on
the sighing wind.
The  night was  old, and westward the waning moon was setting. gleaming
fitfully  through the breaking clouds.  Suddenly  Frodo started  from sleep.
Without warning  a  storm of  howls broke out fierce and wild all  about the
camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking them
from every side at once.
`Fling  fuel on the  fire!' cried  Gandalf to  the  hobbits. `Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!'
In the leaping light, as  the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many grey
shapes spring over  the  ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the
throat of one  huge  leader  Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with  a
great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood
with
his  stout  legs apart,  wielding  his  dwarf-axe.  The  bow of  Legolas was
singing.
In the wavering firelight  Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up,
a  great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of  stone set
upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to
meet the wolves. They gave  back before him. High in  the air he  tossed the
blazing  brand.  It flared with a  sudden white radiance like lightning; and
his voice rolled like thunder.
