howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer and
sometimes
further off.  In the dead  of the night many shining eyes were  seen peering
over the brow of the  hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a
gap  in the circle a great  dark wolf-shape  could be seen halted, gazing at
them.  A shuddering howl  broke from him, as if he  were a captain summoning
his pack to the assault.
Gandalf stood  up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. 'Listen,
Hound of Sauron! ' he cried. `Gandalf is here.  Fly, if you value  your foul
skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.'
The wolf snarled and  sprang towards  them  with a great leap.  At that
moment  there was a sharp twang. Legolas  had  loosed his bow.  There  was a
hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to  the ground; the elvish arrow
had  pierced  its  throat. The  watching  eyes were  suddenly  extinguished.
Gandalf  and  Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting
packs had fled. All about them  the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on
the sighing wind.
The  night was  old, and westward the waning moon was setting. gleaming
fitfully  through the breaking clouds.  Suddenly  Frodo started  from sleep.
Without warning  a  storm of  howls broke out fierce and wild all  about the
camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking them
from every side at once.
`Fling  fuel on the  fire!' cried  Gandalf to  the  hobbits. `Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!'
In the leaping light, as  the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many grey
shapes spring over  the  ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the
throat of one  huge  leader  Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with  a
great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood
with
his  stout  legs apart,  wielding  his  dwarf-axe.  The  bow of  Legolas was
singing.
In the wavering firelight  Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up,
a  great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of  stone set
upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to
meet the wolves. They gave  back before him. High in  the air he  tossed the
blazing  brand.  It flared with a  sudden white radiance like lightning; and
his voice rolled like thunder.
` Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!                ' he cried.
There was a roar and a crackle, and  the  tree above him  burst  into a
leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt  from tree-top to tree-top.
The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords and knives of the
defenders shone and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in  the air
as it flew, and  plunged burning into the  heart of a  great wolf-chieftain.
All the others fled.
Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash  and sparks;
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from the
hill, as the first  light of dawn came dimly in the  sky. Their enemies were
routed and did not return.
`What did I  tell  you,  Mr. Pippin?  ' said Sam, she/thing his  sword.
`Wolves won't get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singed
the hair off my head!'
When  the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to
be found, and they  looked in vain for the  bodies of the  dead. No trace of
the fight remained but the  charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on
the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left.
`It is as  I feared,'  said Gandalf.  `These  were no  ordinary  wolves
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!'
That day  the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command
of some power that had no longer  any use for snow, since they had retreated
from the pass, a power that wished now to have a clear light in which things
that  moved  in the  wild could be  seen from far away.  The  wind  had been
turning through north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The
clouds  vanished southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue.  As  they
stood upon the hill-side, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over  the
mountain-tops.
`We must reach  the doors before sunset,' said Gandalf,  'or I  fear we
shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be winding, for
here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and only
once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago.
`There  it lies,' he said,  pointing away south-eastwards to where  the
mountains' sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet.  In the distance
could  be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs,  and in their midst, taller than
the rest, one great grey wall. `When we left the pass I  led you southwards,
and not  back to  our starting point, as some of you may have noticed. It is
well that I  did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and  haste
is needed. Let us go! '
`I do not know which to hope,' said  Boromir grimly: `that Gandalf will
find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost
for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall
the likeliest chance. Lead on!'
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard's side, so eager was he to come to
Moria. Together they led  the Company back towards the  mountains. The  only
road of old  to Moria from the  west  had lain along the course of a stream,
the Sirannon,  that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors
had stood.  But either Gandalf was astray,  or  else the land had changed in
recent years; for he did not strike the stream where he  looked to  find it,
only a few miles southwards from their start.
The morning was  passing towards noon,  and still the  Company wandered
and scrambled in a barren country  of red stones. Nowhere could they see any
gleam of  water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts
sank.  They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but what the
night  would bring, if it caught them in that  lost land, none of them cared
to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who  had pressed on ahead, called back  to them. He was
standing  on a knoll and pointing to the  right. Hurrying up they saw  below
them  a  deep and narrow channel. It was  empty and  silent,  and  hardly  a
trickle of water flowed among the  brown and red-stained  stones of its bed;
but  on the  near side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound
its way among the ruined walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
'Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. `This is where the stream ran:
Sirannon, the  Gate-stream, they used  to call  it. But what has happened to
the water,  I cannot guess; it used  to  be swift  and noisy.  Come! We must
hurry on. We are late.'
The Company were  footsore and tired; but they  trudged  doggedly along
the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and
began  to go west. After  a brief halt  and a hasty meal they went on again.
Before them the  mountains frowned, but  their path lay in a deep  trough of
land  and  they  could  see only  the higher shoulders and the  far eastward
peaks.
At length they came  to a sharp  bend. There  the road, which had  been
veering southwards between the brink of the channel and  a steep fall of the
