well that I  did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and  haste
is needed. Let us go! '
`I do not know which to hope,' said  Boromir grimly: `that Gandalf will
find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost
for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall
the likeliest chance. Lead on!'
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard's side, so eager was he to come to
Moria. Together they led  the Company back towards the  mountains. The  only
road of old  to Moria from the  west  had lain along the course of a stream,
the Sirannon,  that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors
had stood.  But either Gandalf was astray,  or  else the land had changed in
recent years; for he did not strike the stream where he  looked to  find it,
only a few miles southwards from their start.
The morning was  passing towards noon,  and still the  Company wandered
and scrambled in a barren country  of red stones. Nowhere could they see any
gleam of  water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts
sank.  They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but what the
night  would bring, if it caught them in that  lost land, none of them cared
to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who  had pressed on ahead, called back  to them. He was
standing  on a knoll and pointing to the  right. Hurrying up they saw  below
them  a  deep and narrow channel. It was  empty and  silent,  and  hardly  a
trickle of water flowed among the  brown and red-stained  stones of its bed;
but  on the  near side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound
its way among the ruined walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
'Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. `This is where the stream ran:
Sirannon, the  Gate-stream, they used  to call  it. But what has happened to
the water,  I cannot guess; it used  to  be swift  and noisy.  Come! We must
hurry on. We are late.'
The Company were  footsore and tired; but they  trudged  doggedly along
the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and
began  to go west. After  a brief halt  and a hasty meal they went on again.
Before them the  mountains frowned, but  their path lay in a deep  trough of
land  and  they  could  see only  the higher shoulders and the  far eastward
peaks.
At length they came  to a sharp  bend. There  the road, which had  been
veering southwards between the brink of the channel and  a steep fall of the
land to the left, turned and went due east again. Rounding  the corner  they
saw  before them a  low  cliff, some  five fathoms  high, with a  broken and
jagged  top. Over  it  a trickling water  dripped, through a wide cleft that
seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been strong and full.
`Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. `But there is no mistaking
the  place.  There  is  all  that remains of the  Stair Falls. If I remember
right, there was  a flight of steps cut  in the  rock at their side, but the
main road  wound away left and climbed with several  loops  up  to the level
ground at  the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right
up to the Walls of  Moria, and the Sirannon flowed  through it with the road
beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now! '
They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly
up them,  followed by Gandalf and Frodo.  When they reached the top they saw
that  they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of
the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind  them the sinking Sun filled  the  cool
western sky with glimmering  gold. Before them stretched a dark still  lake.
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had
been dammed  and had filled  all the valley.  Beyond the  ominous water were
reared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in  the fading light: final and
impassable. No sign of gate or entrance,  not a fissure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.
`There  are  the  Walls  of  Moria,' said Gandalf,  pointing across the
water. `And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end
of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None
of  the Company, I guess, will wish to swim this gloomy water at the end  of
the day. It has an unwholesome look.'
`We  must find a way round the northern  edge,' said Gimli. `The  first
thing for the  Company to  do is to climb up  by the main path and see where
that  will lead us.  Even  if  there were  no  lake,  we could not  get  our
baggage-pony up this stair.'
`But in any  case we cannot take the poor  beast  into the Mines,' said
Gandalf. `The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are  places
narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.'
`Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. `I had not thought of that. And poor Sam!
I wonder what he will say? '
`I am sorry,' said Gandalf. `Poor Bill has  been a useful companion and
it goes  to  my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter
and brought no animal, least of  all  this one that Sam is fond of, if I had
had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.'
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in the sky
high above the sunset, when the  Company,  with all  the speed  they  could,
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked
to be no  more  than two or three furlongs at the widest point.  How far  it
stretched  away  southward they could  not see in the failing light; but its
northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between
the  stony ridges  that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a
rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still  a mile  or two
to go  before they could reach the point on the  far shore that  Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to find the doors.
When  they came to the northernmost corner of  the  lake  they  found a
narrow creek that  barred their way. It was green and stagnant,  thrust  out
like  a  slimy  arm  towards  the  enclosing  hills.  Gimli  strode  forward
undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at
the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for
under  the  weedy  pools were sliding  and  greasy  stones, and footing  was
treacherous. Frodo shuddered  with disgust at  the touch of the dark unclean
water on his feet.
As  Sam,  the last of the Company, led Bill up  on to the dry ground on
the  far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a
fish had disturbed the still surface of  the water. Turning quickly they saw
ripples, black-edged  with shadow in  the  waning  light: great  rings  were
widening outwards from  a point far out in the lake.  There  was  a bubbling
noise, and then silence.  The  dusk  deepened, and  the  last gleams of  the
sunset were veiled in cloud.
Gandalf  now  pressed on  at  a great pace, and the  others followed as
quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry  land between  the lake
and the cliffs: it  was  narrow,  often  hardly  a  dozen yards  across, and
encumbered  with fallen  rock  and stones; but they found a way, hugging the
cliff,  and  keeping  as  far  from the  dark water as  they might.  A  mile
southwards  along  the shore  they  came upon holly trees.  Stumps  and dead
boughs were rotting  in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,
or of a hedge that had once lined the  road  across the drowned valley.  But
close under the cliff  there  stood,  still strong and  living,  . two  tall
trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo  had ever seen or imagined.
