and brought no animal, least of  all  this one that Sam is fond of, if I had
had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.'
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in the sky
high above the sunset, when the  Company,  with all  the speed  they  could,
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked
to be no  more  than two or three furlongs at the widest point.  How far  it
stretched  away  southward they could  not see in the failing light; but its
northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between
the  stony ridges  that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a
rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still  a mile  or two
to go  before they could reach the point on the  far shore that  Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to find the doors.
When  they came to the northernmost corner of  the  lake  they  found a
narrow creek that  barred their way. It was green and stagnant,  thrust  out
like  a  slimy  arm  towards  the  enclosing  hills.  Gimli  strode  forward
undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at
the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for
under  the  weedy  pools were sliding  and  greasy  stones, and footing  was
treacherous. Frodo shuddered  with disgust at  the touch of the dark unclean
water on his feet.
As  Sam,  the last of the Company, led Bill up  on to the dry ground on
the  far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a
fish had disturbed the still surface of  the water. Turning quickly they saw
ripples, black-edged  with shadow in  the  waning  light: great  rings  were
widening outwards from  a point far out in the lake.  There  was  a bubbling
noise, and then silence.  The  dusk  deepened, and  the  last gleams of  the
sunset were veiled in cloud.
Gandalf  now  pressed on  at  a great pace, and the  others followed as
quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry  land between  the lake
and the cliffs: it  was  narrow,  often  hardly  a  dozen yards  across, and
encumbered  with fallen  rock  and stones; but they found a way, hugging the
cliff,  and  keeping  as  far  from the  dark water as  they might.  A  mile
southwards  along  the shore  they  came upon holly trees.  Stumps  and dead
boughs were rotting  in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,
or of a hedge that had once lined the  road  across the drowned valley.  But
close under the cliff  there  stood,  still strong and  living,  . two  tall
trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo  had ever seen or imagined.
Their  great  roots spread  from the  wall to the  water. Under the  looming
cliffs  they had looked like mere bushes, when seen  far off from the top of
the Stair; but now they  towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing
deep night-shadows about their feet,  standing  like sentinel pillars at the
end of the road.
`Well, here  we are at last!  ' said  Gandalf. 'Here the Elven-way from
Hollin ended. Holly  was  the  token  of the  people of that land, and  they
planted it here to mark the end of their  domain; for the West-door was made
chiefly for their  use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those  were
happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of
different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.'
'It was not  the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship  waned,' said
Gimli.
'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,' said Legolas.
'I have heard both,' said Gandalf; 'and I will not give judgement  now.
But I beg you two, Legolas  and Gimli, at least  to  be friends, and to help
me. I need you  both. The  doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find
them the better. Night is at hand! '
Turning to  the others he said:  'While I  am  searching, will you each
make ready to enter the  Mines? For here I fear we  must say farewell to our
good  beast of burden. You must lay aside much  of the stuff that we brought
against  bitter weather:  you will  not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we
come through  and journey on down  into the South.  Instead each of us  must
take  a  share  of  what  the pony  carried,  especially  the food  and  the
water-skins.'
'But you can't  leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken  place, Mr.
Gandalf! ' cried Sam,  angry and  distressed.  `I won't have  it, and that's
flat. After he has come so far and all! '
'I am sorry, Sam,'  said the wizard. `But when the  Door opens I do not
think  you will  be able  to  drag your Bill  inside, into  the long dark of
Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.'
'He'd  follow Mr. Frodo into  a dragon's  den, if I led him,' protested
Sam.  `It'd  be nothing short  of murder  to turn  him loose with  all these
wolves about.'
'It will be short of murder, I hope,' said Gandalf. He laid his hand on
the pony's head, and spoke  in  a  low voice. `Go with  words  of  guard and
guiding on you,' he said. `You are a wise  beast, and  have  learned much in
Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in
time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go.
`There, Sam! He will have quite as  much chance of escaping wolves  and
getting home as we have.'
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming to
understand well what  was going on, nuzzled up to  him,  putting his nose to
Sam's  ear. Sam burst into tears, and  fumbled with the straps, unlading all
the pony's packs and throwing them on the ground. The others  sorted out the
goods, making a  pile of all that could be left behind,  and dividing up the
rest.
When this was  done  they turned to watch Gandalf. He  appeared to have
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall
of the cliff, as if he  would bore a hole  into it  with his eyes. Gimli was
wandering about, tapping the stone here  and there with his axe. Legolas was
pressed against the rock, as if listening.
'Well, here  we are and all ready,'  said  Merry;  `but  where  are the
Doors? I can't see any sign of them.'
'Dwarf-doors are  not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. `They are
invisible, and their own  masters cannot  find them or  open them,  if their
secret is forgotten.'
'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' said
Gandalf, coming  suddenly to  life and turning  round.  `Unless  things  are
altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.'
He walked forward  to the wall. Right  between the shadow  of the trees
there  was a smooth space,  and over this he passed  his  hands to and  fro,
muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back.
'Look!' he said. `Can you see anything now?'
The Moon  now shone upon the grey face of the  rock; but they could see
nothing else for a  while.  Then slowly on the surface, where  the  wizard's
hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins of silver running
in the stone. At first they were no more than pale gossamer-threads, so fine
that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon  caught  them,  but steadily
they grew broader and clearer, until their design could be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was  an arch of interlacing
letters in an Elvish  character. Below,  though  the threads were in  places
blurred  or  broken,  the  outline could be seen of an  anvil  and  a hammer
