Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in
time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go.
`There, Sam! He will have quite as  much chance of escaping wolves  and
getting home as we have.'
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming to
understand well what  was going on, nuzzled up to  him,  putting his nose to
Sam's  ear. Sam burst into tears, and  fumbled with the straps, unlading all
the pony's packs and throwing them on the ground. The others  sorted out the
goods, making a  pile of all that could be left behind,  and dividing up the
rest.
When this was  done  they turned to watch Gandalf. He  appeared to have
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall
of the cliff, as if he  would bore a hole  into it  with his eyes. Gimli was
wandering about, tapping the stone here  and there with his axe. Legolas was
pressed against the rock, as if listening.
'Well, here  we are and all ready,'  said  Merry;  `but  where  are the
Doors? I can't see any sign of them.'
'Dwarf-doors are  not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. `They are
invisible, and their own  masters cannot  find them or  open them,  if their
secret is forgotten.'
'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' said
Gandalf, coming  suddenly to  life and turning  round.  `Unless  things  are
altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.'
He walked forward  to the wall. Right  between the shadow  of the trees
there  was a smooth space,  and over this he passed  his  hands to and  fro,
muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back.
'Look!' he said. `Can you see anything now?'
The Moon  now shone upon the grey face of the  rock; but they could see
nothing else for a  while.  Then slowly on the surface, where  the  wizard's
hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins of silver running
in the stone. At first they were no more than pale gossamer-threads, so fine
that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon  caught  them,  but steadily
they grew broader and clearer, until their design could be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was  an arch of interlacing
letters in an Elvish  character. Below,  though  the threads were in  places
blurred  or  broken,  the  outline could be seen of an  anvil  and  a hammer
surmounted by a crown with seven  stars. Beneath these again were two trees,
each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone forth in
the middle of the door a single star with many rays.
`There are the emblems of Durin!' cried Gimli.
`And there is the Tree of the High Elves!' said Legolas.
`And the Star of the House of Flanor,' said Gandalf. `They  are wrought
of   ithildin  that mirrors only starlight  and moonlight, and sleeps until it
is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is
long since I heard them, and I thought deeply  before I could recall them to
my mind.'
'What does the writing  say?' asked  Frodo, who was trying  to decipher
the inscription on the arch. 'I thought I knew the elf-letters but  I cannot
read these.'
`The words are in  the elven-tongue of the West of  Middle-earth in the
Elder Days,' answered Gandalf.  'But they do not say anything  of importance
to us.  They say only:      The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and
enter.   And  underneath  small and faint  is written:             I, Narvi,  made them.
Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.            '
`What does it mean by        speak, friend, and enter      ?' asked Merry.
'That is plain enough,'  said  Gimli. `If  you are a friend,  speak the
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.'
'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'these doors are probably  governed by words. Some
dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for  particular persons; and
some have locks and keys that  are still needed when all necessary times and
words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not
secret. They usually  stood  open  and doorwards sat here. But  if they were
shut, any who  knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At least so
it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? '
'It is,' said the dwarf. `But what the  word  was  is  not  remembered.
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.'
'But do not   you   know the word, Gandalf? ' asked Boromir in surprise.
`No! ' said the wizard.
The others looked  dismayed;  only  Aragorn,  who  knew  Gandalf  well,
remained silent and unmoved.
'Then  what was  the use of bringing us to this  accursed spot?'  cried
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at  the dark water. `You  told us that
you had  once passed  through the  Mines. How  could that be, if you did not
know how to enter? '
`The answer to your first question, Boromir,' said the wizard, `is that
I do not know the word-yet. But we shall soon see.  And,' he added,  with  a
glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what  is the use
of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for your other question: do you
doubt  my  tale? Or have you no wits left? I did  not enter this way. I came
from the East.
`If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors  open  outwards.
From the inside you may thrust them open with  your  hands. From the outside
nothing  will move  them  save  the spell of command.  They cannot be forced
inwards.'
`What  are  you going  to do  then? '  asked  Pippin, undaunted  by the
wizard's bristling brows.
`Knock on  the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,' said Gandalf. `But
if that does not shatter them, and I  am allowed a little peace from foolish
questions, I will seek for the opening words.
`I  once knew every spell in all the tongues  of Elves or  Men  or Orcs
that was  ever  used for such a purpose. I can still  remember  ten score of
them  without searching in  my mind. But only a few trials, I think, will be
needed;  and I  shall not  have  to call on  Gimli for  words  of the secret
dwarf-tongue  that  they  teach to none. The opening words were Elvish, like
the writing on the arch: that seems certain.'
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff the
silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said  in a commanding voice.  The silver lines faded, but the  blank
grey stone did not stir.
Many times he  repeated these words in different order, or varied them.
Then  he tried other spells.  one  after another,  speaking  now faster  and
louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single words of Elvish speech.
Nothing happened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were
kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the  wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke in
tones of command and rising wrath.             Edro, edro!     he cried, and struck the rock
with  his  staff.    Open,  open!     he shouted, and followed  it with  the  same
command  in  every  language that had  ever  been  spoken  in  the  West  of
