know how to enter? '
`The answer to your first question, Boromir,' said the wizard, `is that
I do not know the word-yet. But we shall soon see.  And,' he added,  with  a
glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what  is the use
of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for your other question: do you
doubt  my  tale? Or have you no wits left? I did  not enter this way. I came
from the East.
`If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors  open  outwards.
From the inside you may thrust them open with  your  hands. From the outside
nothing  will move  them  save  the spell of command.  They cannot be forced
inwards.'
`What  are  you going  to do  then? '  asked  Pippin, undaunted  by the
wizard's bristling brows.
`Knock on  the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,' said Gandalf. `But
if that does not shatter them, and I  am allowed a little peace from foolish
questions, I will seek for the opening words.
`I  once knew every spell in all the tongues  of Elves or  Men  or Orcs
that was  ever  used for such a purpose. I can still  remember  ten score of
them  without searching in  my mind. But only a few trials, I think, will be
needed;  and I  shall not  have  to call on  Gimli for  words  of the secret
dwarf-tongue  that  they  teach to none. The opening words were Elvish, like
the writing on the arch: that seems certain.'
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff the
silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said  in a commanding voice.  The silver lines faded, but the  blank
grey stone did not stir.
Many times he  repeated these words in different order, or varied them.
Then  he tried other spells.  one  after another,  speaking  now faster  and
louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single words of Elvish speech.
Nothing happened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were
kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the  wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke in
tones of command and rising wrath.             Edro, edro!     he cried, and struck the rock
with  his  staff.    Open,  open!     he shouted, and followed  it with  the  same
command  in  every  language that had  ever  been  spoken  in  the  West  of
Middle-earth.  Then he  threw  his  staff  on the  ground, and  sat down  in
silence.
At that moment from far off the  wind bore to their listening ears  the
howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his side
and whispered softly to him.
'Do not let him run away! ' said Boromir. 'It seems that we  shall need
him still, if the wolves do not  find us. How  I  hate  this foul pool! ' He
stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the dark water.
The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at  the same instant there was
a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface  out beyond
where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly towards  the  foot  of the
cliff.
'Why did  you do  that, Boromir? ' said Frodo. `I hate this place, too,
and I am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the
doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don't disturb it! '
'l wish we could get away! ' said Merry.
'Why doesn't Gandalf do something quick? ' said Pippin.
Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat  with his head bowed,  either in
despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was  heard
again. The ripples  on the water  grew and came  closer;  some were  already
lapping on the shore.
With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his feet.
He was laughing! `I have it! '  he  cried. 'Of  course, of  course! Absurdly
simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.'
Picking up  his  staff he  stood before  the rock and  said  in a clear
voice:   Mellon!
The  star  shone  out briefly  and faded again.  Then silently  a great
doorway was  outlined, though not a  crack or joint had been visible before.
Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch  by inch, until both
doors lay back against the wall.  Through the opening a shadowy stair  could
be seen climbing steeply up; but  beyond the  lower  steps the darkness  was
deeper than the night. The Company stared in wonder.
`I was wrong after all,' said  Gandalf, 'and Gimli  too. Merry, of  all
people, was on  the  right track.  The  opening word  was  inscribed on  the
archway  all the time!  The translation  should have been:                 Say "Friend" and
enter.  I had only to speak the Elvish word for            friend   and the  doors opened.
Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days.
Those were happier times. Now let us go!'
He strode  forward  and  set his foot  on the lowest  step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by the ankle,
and he fell with a cry. Bill  the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped  after
him, and  then hearing Frodo's cry  he ran back again, weeping  and cursing.
The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end.
Out  from  the  water  a  long sinuous  tentacle had  crawled;  it  was
pale-green  and luminous and wet.  Its fingered end had hold of Frodo's foot
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it
with a knife.
The arm  let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help.
Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a
hideous stench.
`Into  the gateway!  Up  the stairs!  Quick! ' shouted Gandalf  leaping
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.
They were  just in time. Sam and  Frodo were  only  a few steps up, and
Gandalf had just  begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed  across
the  narrow  shore  and  fingered  the cliff-wall  and  the  doors. One came
wriggling over  the  threshold, glistening in  the starlight. Gandalf turned
and paused. If he  was considering what word would close the gate again from
within, there  was no  need. Many  coiling  arms seized the  doors on either
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round.  With a shattering  echo
they slammed,  and all  light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came
dully through the ponderous stone.
Sam,  clinging  to  Frodo's arm, collapsed  on  a  step  in  the  black
darkness.  `Poor old  Bill!  ' he said in a choking  voice. `Poor  old Bill!
Wolves  and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him.  I  had to choose,
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.'
They heard Gandalf go back down  the steps and thrust his staff against
the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the
doors did  not open. `Well, well! ' said the wizard. `The passage is blocked
behind  us now  and there is only one  way  out--on  the other  side  of the
mountains. I fear from the sounds that  boulders have been piled up, and the
trees  uprooted and thrown across the gate. I  am sorry; for the trees  were
