Those were happier times. Now let us go!'
He strode  forward  and  set his foot  on the lowest  step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by the ankle,
and he fell with a cry. Bill  the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped  after
him, and  then hearing Frodo's cry  he ran back again, weeping  and cursing.
The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end.
Out  from  the  water  a  long sinuous  tentacle had  crawled;  it  was
pale-green  and luminous and wet.  Its fingered end had hold of Frodo's foot
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it
with a knife.
The arm  let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help.
Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a
hideous stench.
`Into  the gateway!  Up  the stairs!  Quick! ' shouted Gandalf  leaping
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.
They were  just in time. Sam and  Frodo were  only  a few steps up, and
Gandalf had just  begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed  across
the  narrow  shore  and  fingered  the cliff-wall  and  the  doors. One came
wriggling over  the  threshold, glistening in  the starlight. Gandalf turned
and paused. If he  was considering what word would close the gate again from
within, there  was no  need. Many  coiling  arms seized the  doors on either
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round.  With a shattering  echo
they slammed,  and all  light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came
dully through the ponderous stone.
Sam,  clinging  to  Frodo's arm, collapsed  on  a  step  in  the  black
darkness.  `Poor old  Bill!  ' he said in a choking  voice. `Poor  old Bill!
Wolves  and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him.  I  had to choose,
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.'
They heard Gandalf go back down  the steps and thrust his staff against
the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the
doors did  not open. `Well, well! ' said the wizard. `The passage is blocked
behind  us now  and there is only one  way  out--on  the other  side  of the
mountains. I fear from the sounds that  boulders have been piled up, and the
trees  uprooted and thrown across the gate. I  am sorry; for the trees  were
beautiful, and had stood so long.'
`I felt that  something horrible was near from  the moment that my foot
first  touched the water,'  said Frodo. 'What  was the  thing, or were there
many of them? '
'I do not know,' answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one
purpose.  Something has  crept, or has  been driven out of dark waters under
the mountains.  There  are  older and  fouler things  than  Orcs in the deep
places of  the world.'  He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever  it
was  that dwelt  in the lake, it had  seized  on Frodo  first among  all the
Company.
Boromir muttered under  his breath, but the echoing stone magnified the
sound to a  hoarse  whisper  that all could hear: `In the deep places of the
world!  And thither we are going against my wish.  Who will lead  us  now in
this deadly dark? '
'I will,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff!
'
As  the wizard passed  on ahead up  the great steps, he held  his staff
aloft, and from its tip there came  a faint radiance. The wide  stairway was
sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad and shallow;
and
at the top they found  an arched  passage with a level floor leading on into
the dark.
`Let us  sit and rest and  have  something to eat, here on the landing,
since  we can't find a dining-room! ' said  Frodo. He had begun to shake off
the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry.
The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps,
dim figures  in the gloom. After they had eaten,  Gandalf gave  them each  a
third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell.
`It will not last much longer, I am  afraid,' he said; 'but I  think we
need it after that horror at  the gate. And unless we have  great  luck,  we
shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go  carefully with
the water, too!  There are  many streams  and wells in  the Mines,  but they
should not be touched. We  may  not  have a chance of filling  our skins and
bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.'
'How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo.
'I  cannot  say,'  answered Gandalf.  'It depends  on many chances. But
going straight,  without mishap  or  losing our  way, we shall take three or
four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West-door to
East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.'
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager
to  get the journey over as quickly  as possible, and were willing, tired as
they  were, to go on  marching  still for  several hours. Gandalf  walked in
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light
of which just showed the ground before  his feet; in his right he  held  his
sword Glamdring.  Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in  the dim light
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf  walked Frodo, and
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of  Sting
or of  Glamdring;  and  that was some comfort, for being the work of  Elvish
smiths in  the Elder  Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs
were near  at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after  him  Legolas,  and the
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked
Aragorn.
The passage  twisted  round a few  turns, and then began to descend. It
went steadily down for  a long while before it became level once again.  The
air grew  hot and  stifling, but  it was  not  foul, and at times they  felt
currents of cooler air upon  their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings
in the walls.  There  were  many of  these. In the  pale ray of the wizard's
staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches and of  other passages and
tunnels, sloping  up,  or  running steeply down, or opening  blankly dark on
either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering.
Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout  courage. At least
he  was not,  as  were most of the  others, troubled by the mere darkness in
itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was
doubtful; but it was  always  Gandalf who had the final word. The  Mines  of
Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination  of Gimli, Gluin's son,
dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of
a  journey long  before were now of little help, but  even  in the gloom and
despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did
not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal.
`Do not be afraid! ' said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than usual,
and Gandalf and Gimli were  whispering  together; the  others  were  crowded
behind, waiting anxiously. `Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a
journey,  if  never on  one so dark; and  there  are tales  of  Rivendell of
greater  deeds  of his than any that I have seen. He  will  not go astray-if
