four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West-door to
East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.'
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager
to  get the journey over as quickly  as possible, and were willing, tired as
they  were, to go on  marching  still for  several hours. Gandalf  walked in
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light
of which just showed the ground before  his feet; in his right he  held  his
sword Glamdring.  Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in  the dim light
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf  walked Frodo, and
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of  Sting
or of  Glamdring;  and  that was some comfort, for being the work of  Elvish
smiths in  the Elder  Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs
were near  at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after  him  Legolas,  and the
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked
Aragorn.
The passage  twisted  round a few  turns, and then began to descend. It
went steadily down for  a long while before it became level once again.  The
air grew  hot and  stifling, but  it was  not  foul, and at times they  felt
currents of cooler air upon  their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings
in the walls.  There  were  many of  these. In the  pale ray of the wizard's
staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches and of  other passages and
tunnels, sloping  up,  or  running steeply down, or opening  blankly dark on
either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering.
Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout  courage. At least
he  was not,  as  were most of the  others, troubled by the mere darkness in
itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was
doubtful; but it was  always  Gandalf who had the final word. The  Mines  of
Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination  of Gimli, Gluin's son,
dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of
a  journey long  before were now of little help, but  even  in the gloom and
despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did
not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal.
`Do not be afraid! ' said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than usual,
and Gandalf and Gimli were  whispering  together; the  others  were  crowded
behind, waiting anxiously. `Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a
journey,  if  never on  one so dark; and  there  are tales  of  Rivendell of
greater  deeds  of his than any that I have seen. He  will  not go astray-if
there is any path to find. He has  led us in here  against our fears, but he
will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is  surer of finding
the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Ber®thiel.'
It was well for  the Company that  they  had such  a guide. They had no
fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at the doors
many things had been left behind. But without any light they would soon have
come  to grief. There  were not only  many roads  to choose from, there were
also  in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells beside  the  path in
which their passing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls
and floor, and  every  now  and  then  a crack would open right before their
feet.  The widest was more than seven  feet across, and it  was long  before
Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap.  The noise
of churning water came  up from  far below, as if  some great mill-wheel was
turning in the depths.
`Rope! ' muttered Sam. `I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! '
As  these  dangers  became  more frequent  their  march became  slower.
Already  they  seemed  to  have  been  tramping  on, on,  endlessly  to  the
mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort
in  the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's  spirits had risen  for a while
after his escape, and  after food and a draught  of the  cordial; but  now a
deep uneasiness, growing to  dread, crept over him again. Though he had been
healed  in  Rivendell  of the  knife-stroke,  that grim  wound had  not been
without effect. His senses were sharper and more aware  of things that could
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed  was that he  could
see more in the  dark  than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And
he was  in any case  the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain  against
his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of
evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He gripped tighter on
the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.
The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried whispers.
There  was  no  sound  but  the  sound of  their own feet; the dull stump of
Gimli's dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the  light step of Legolas;
the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear  the slow firm
footfalls of  Aragorn with his  long stride.  When they halted  for a moment
they  heard nothing  at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and
drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine  that he heard,
something else:  like the faint  fall of soft bare feet. It  was  never loud
enough, or near  enough, for him to  feel certain that he heard it; but once
it had started it never stopped, while  the Company was moving. But  it  was
not an echo, for when they halted it pattered on for a little all by itself,
and then grew still.
It was after nightfall when they had  entered the  Mines. They had been
going for several hours with only  brief  halts,  when Gandalf came  to  his
first serious check.  Before  him stood a wide dark arch  opening into three
passages: all  led  in  the  same  general  direction,  eastwards;  but  the
left-hand  passage plunged  down, while the right-hand climbed up,  and  the
middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow.
'I  have no  memory of this  place  at all! '  said  Gandalf,  standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of finding some
marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was
to be seen. `I am too  weary to decide,'  he said, shaking his head. `And  I
expect  that you are all as weary  as I  am, or wearier.  We had better halt
here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever
dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and  the middle-night has
passed.'
`Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hope  those wolves
haven't got him yet.'
To the  left of  the great arch  they  found a stone door:  it was half
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie
a wide chamber cut in the rock.
`Steady! Steady!  ' cried  Gandalf as Merry and  Pippin pushed forward,
glad to find a place where  they could  rest  with  at least more feeling of
shelter than  in  the open passage. `Steady! You do  not know what is inside
yet. I will go first.'
He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. `There! '  he said,
pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw
a large round hole like the  mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at
the edge and trailed down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near.
'One of you might have fallen in and  still be wondering  when you were
going to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let  the guide go first
while you have one.'
'This seems  to  have been a guardroom, made for  the  watching  of the
three passages,'  said Gimli. `That hole was plainly a  well for the guards'
use, covered with a stone lid. But the  lid is broken, and we  must all take
