enough, or near  enough, for him to  feel certain that he heard it; but once
it had started it never stopped, while  the Company was moving. But  it  was
not an echo, for when they halted it pattered on for a little all by itself,
and then grew still.
It was after nightfall when they had  entered the  Mines. They had been
going for several hours with only  brief  halts,  when Gandalf came  to  his
first serious check.  Before  him stood a wide dark arch  opening into three
passages: all  led  in  the  same  general  direction,  eastwards;  but  the
left-hand  passage plunged  down, while the right-hand climbed up,  and  the
middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow.
'I  have no  memory of this  place  at all! '  said  Gandalf,  standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of finding some
marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was
to be seen. `I am too  weary to decide,'  he said, shaking his head. `And  I
expect  that you are all as weary  as I  am, or wearier.  We had better halt
here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever
dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and  the middle-night has
passed.'
`Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hope  those wolves
haven't got him yet.'
To the  left of  the great arch  they  found a stone door:  it was half
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie
a wide chamber cut in the rock.
`Steady! Steady!  ' cried  Gandalf as Merry and  Pippin pushed forward,
glad to find a place where  they could  rest  with  at least more feeling of
shelter than  in  the open passage. `Steady! You do  not know what is inside
yet. I will go first.'
He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. `There! '  he said,
pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw
a large round hole like the  mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at
the edge and trailed down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near.
'One of you might have fallen in and  still be wondering  when you were
going to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let  the guide go first
while you have one.'
'This seems  to  have been a guardroom, made for  the  watching  of the
three passages,'  said Gimli. `That hole was plainly a  well for the guards'
use, covered with a stone lid. But the  lid is broken, and we  must all take
care in the dark.'
Pippin  felt  curiously attracted by  the  well. While the  others were
unrolling  blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber, as far
as  possible from the hole in  the floor, he crept  to the  edge  and peered
over. A chill air seemed to  strike his face,  rising from invisible depths.
Moved by  a sudden impulse he groped for a loose  stone, and let it drop. He
felt  his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Then  far below,
as if  the stone had fallen into deep water in  some cavernous place,  there
came a    plunk  , very distant, but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft.
`What's that? ' cried Gandalf.  He was relieved  when  Pippin confessed
what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see  his  eye glinting.
'Fool  of a Took!  '  he growled. 'This  is a serious journey,  not a hobbit
walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and  then you will be no further
nuisance. Now be quiet! '
Nothing more was heard for several  minutes; but then there came out of
the depths faint knocks:       tom-tap, tap-tom      . They stopped, and when the echoes
had  died away, they  were repeated:            tap-tom,  tom-tap, tap-tap, tom         .  They
sounded  disquietingly  like signals of  some  sort;  but after a  while the
knocking died away and was not heard again.
'That  was  the  sound of a  hammer, or I have never heard  one,'  said
Gimli.
`Yes,' said  Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may  have nothing to do
with Peregrin's  foolish  stone; but  probably something  has been disturbed
that would have been better left quiet.  Pray, do nothing of the kind again!
Let us hope we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can
go on the first watch, as a  reward,' he growled, as he  rolled himself in a
blanket.
Pippin  sat  miserably  by  the door in  the pitch dark; but he kept on
turning  round, fearing  that some unknown thing would  crawl  up out of the
well.  He  wished he could cover  the  hole,  if only with a blanket, but he
dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep.
Actually Gandalf was awake, though  lying still and silent. He was deep
in  thought,  trying  to recall  every memory of  his former journey in  the
Mines,  and considering  anxiously  the next  course  that he should take; a
false turn now might be disastrous.  After an hour  he rose up and came over
to Pippin.
`Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,' he said in a kindly tone.
'You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so  I may  as well do the
watching.'
'I know what is the matter with me,' he muttered, as he sat down by the
door.  'I  need  smoke!  I have not tasted  it since the morning  before the
snowstorm.'
The  last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took  him, was a dark glimpse
of  the  old  wizard huddled on  the floor,  shielding a glowing chip in his
gnarled hands  between his knees.  The flicker for a moment showed his sharp
nose. and the puff of smoke.
It was  Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He  had sat and watched
all alone for  about six hours, and had let  the others  rest.  `And  in the
watches I have  made up my mind,' he  said. `I do  not  like the feel of the
middle way; and  I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul
air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. It is
time we began to climb up again.'
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief  halts,  they marched  on;
and they met no  danger, and heard nothing, and  saw nothing  but the  faint
gleam  of  the wizard's  light, bobbing like  a will-o'-the-wisp in front of
them. The passage  they  had  chosen wound steadily upwards. As  far as they
could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier
and wider.  There  were  now no openings  to  other galleries or  tunnels on
either side, and the floor  was level  and sound,  without  pits or  cracks.
Evidently  they had struck  what once had  been an important road; and  they
went forward quicker than they had done on their first march.
In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line
east, though  they must have actually walked twenty miles  or  more. As  the
road climbed  upwards`  Frodo's spirits rose  a little;  but he  still  felt
oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the
Company and beyond the fall and patter of  their feet, a following  footstep
that was not an echo.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and
all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the walls
to  right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed through some  arched
doorway into a black and empty space. There  was  a great draught of  warmer
air behind them, and before  them the darkness was cold on their faces. They
halted and crowded anxiously together.
Gandalf seemed pleased. `I chose the right way,'  he said. `At  last we
