'You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so  I may  as well do the
watching.'
'I know what is the matter with me,' he muttered, as he sat down by the
door.  'I  need  smoke!  I have not tasted  it since the morning  before the
snowstorm.'
The  last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took  him, was a dark glimpse
of  the  old  wizard huddled on  the floor,  shielding a glowing chip in his
gnarled hands  between his knees.  The flicker for a moment showed his sharp
nose. and the puff of smoke.
It was  Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He  had sat and watched
all alone for  about six hours, and had let  the others  rest.  `And  in the
watches I have  made up my mind,' he  said. `I do  not  like the feel of the
middle way; and  I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul
air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. It is
time we began to climb up again.'
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief  halts,  they marched  on;
and they met no  danger, and heard nothing, and  saw nothing  but the  faint
gleam  of  the wizard's  light, bobbing like  a will-o'-the-wisp in front of
them. The passage  they  had  chosen wound steadily upwards. As  far as they
could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier
and wider.  There  were  now no openings  to  other galleries or  tunnels on
either side, and the floor  was level  and sound,  without  pits or  cracks.
Evidently  they had struck  what once had  been an important road; and  they
went forward quicker than they had done on their first march.
In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line
east, though  they must have actually walked twenty miles  or  more. As  the
road climbed  upwards`  Frodo's spirits rose  a little;  but he  still  felt
oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the
Company and beyond the fall and patter of  their feet, a following  footstep
that was not an echo.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and
all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the walls
to  right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed through some  arched
doorway into a black and empty space. There  was  a great draught of  warmer
air behind them, and before  them the darkness was cold on their faces. They
halted and crowded anxiously together.
Gandalf seemed pleased. `I chose the right way,'  he said. `At  last we
are  coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from
the eastern side. But we are  high up, a good deal higher than  the  Dimrill
Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide
hall. I will now risk a little real light.'
He  raised his staff,  and for a  brief instant there was blaze  like a
flash  of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and fled, and for a second they
saw a vast roof  far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of
stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black
walls, polished  and smooth  as  glass, flashed and glittered.  Three  other
entrances  they saw, dark black  arches: one straight before them eastwards,
and one on either side. Then the light went out.
`That  is all that I shall venture on for the  present,' said  Gandalf.
'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out
to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached them
now, but it is  night outside again, and we  cannot tell until morning. If I
am right, tomorrow we may  actually see  the morning peeping  in. But in the
meanwhile we had better go  no further. Let  us rest, if we can. Things have
gone well  so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are
not through yet, and it is a long way down to the  Gates  that open  on  the
world.'
The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled close
together  in a corner  to escape  the draught:  there seemed  to be a steady
inflow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about them as  they lay
hung the darkness,  hollow and  immense,  and  they  were  oppressed by  the
loneliness and vastness of  the dolven halls and endlessly branching  stairs
and passages. The wildest imaginings  that dark rumour had ever suggested to
the hobbits fell altogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.
`There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' said
Sam; `and every one  of them busier  than badgers for five  hundred years to
make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for?  They
didn't live in these darksome holes surely? '
`These are not holes,' said Gimli. `This is the great realm and city of
the Dwarrowdelf. And  of  old  it was  not  darksome, but  full of light and
splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.'
He rose  and standing in the dark he  began to  chant in a  deep voice,
while the echoes ran away into the roof.
The world was young, the mountains green,
No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.
He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;
He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars appear,
As gems upon a silver thread,
Above the shadow of his head.
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:
The world was fair in Durin's Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver floor,
And runes of power upon the door.
The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lamps of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,
And metal wrought like fishes' mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin's folk
Beneath the mountains music woke:
