head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it,
and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small,
is  his province. He  has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their
making; but when the  Rings  were debated  in the Council, all that he would
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept - but
uneasily. Still I watched and I waited.
'And all  seemed well  with  Bilbo. And  the  years  passed. Yes,  they
passed, and  they seemed  not to touch him.  He showed no signs of age.  The
shadow fell  on me  again. But I said  to  myself: "After all he comes of  a
long-lived family on his mother's side. There is time yet. Wait!"
'And  I waited.  Until  that night when he left this house. He said and
did things then that  filled me with a  fear that no words  of Saruman could
allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. And I have
spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.'
'There  wasn't  any  permanent  harm  done,  was  there?'  asked  Frodo
anxiously. 'He would  get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in
peace, I mean?'
'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power in
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I
know there is no Power  in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the
Wise I  am  the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch  of
knowledge, but  full  of surprises.  Soft as  butter  they  can be,  and yet
sometimes as tough as old  tree-roots.  I  think it likely  that  some would
resist the  Rings far longer  than most of the Wise  would believe.  I don't
think you need worry about Bilbo.
'Of  course, he possessed the ring  for many years,  and used it, so it
might take a long while for the  influence to  wear off - before it was safe
for him to see it  again, for  instance.  Otherwise,  he might  live on  for
years,  quite happily: just stop  as  he was when he parted with  it. For he
gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I  was  not
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the  thing go. It is for
you   that I feel responsible.
'Ever  since  Bilbo left  I have been deeply concerned  about you,  and
about all  these charming, absurd, helpless  hobbits. It would be a grievous
blow to the world, if  the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all  your kind,
jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not
to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.'
Frodo shuddered. 'But why  should we be?'  he asked. 'And why should he
want such slaves?'
'To tell you the  truth,' replied Gandalf,  'I  believe that hitherto -
hitherto,    mark you - he has entirely overlooked the existence  of  hobbits.
You should be thankful. But your  safety has passed. He does not need you  -
he  has  many  more useful  servants  -  but  he won't forget you again. And
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than hobbits happy and
free. There is such a thing as malice and revenge.'
'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand what
all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.'
'It has everything to do with  it,' said Gandalf. 'You do  not know the
real peril  yet; but  you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last
here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment.'
Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain
that hung  from  his  belt. He unfastened  it  and handed  it slowly  to the
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in
some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it.
Gandalf held it up. It looked  to be  made of pure and solid gold. 'Can
you see any markings on it?' he asked.
'No,'  said  Frodo. 'There  are none. It is quite  plain,  and it never
shows a scratch or sign of wear.'
'Well  then, look!'  To Frodo's  astonishment and  distress  the wizard
threw it suddenly  into the middle  of a glowing corner  of the fire.  Frodo
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back.
'Wait!' he said in a commanding voice,  giving Frodo a quick  look from
under his bristling brows.
No apparent  change came over the ring. After a  while  Gandalf got up,
closed  the shutters outside the window,  and drew  the  curtains.  The room
became dark and silent, though the  clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the
windows,  could  still be heard  faintly from the garden. For  a  moment the
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and  removed  the ring  to
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped.
It  is quite cool,' said Gandalf. 'Take it!' Frodo received  it  on his
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever.
'Hold it up!' said Gandalf. 'And look closely!'
As  Frodo  did  so,  he  now  saw  fine  lines, finer than  the  finest
pen-strokes,  running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that
seemed  to  form  the  letters of a flowing  script. They  shone  piercingly
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth.
I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice.
'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The  letters are Elvish,  of an ancient
mode, but the  language is that of Mordor, which I will  not utter here. But
this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.
It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:
Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.'
He  paused,  and  then  said  slowly in  a  deep voice:  'This  is  the
Master-ring, the One  Ring to rule them all.  This is the  One  Ring that he
lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of  his power. He greatly desires
it - but he must    not  get it.'
Frodo sat silent  and motionless.  Fear seemed  to stretch out  a  vast
hand, like a dark  cloud rising in the East and  looming  up  to engulf him.
'This ring!' he stammered. 'How, how on earth did it come to me?'
'Ah!' said Gandalf. 'That is a very long story. The beginnings lie back
in  the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If  I were to
tell  you all  that tale, we should still  be sitting  here when  Spring had
passed into Winter.
'But last  night  I told  you of Sauron the Great,  the Dark  Lord. The
rumours that you have  heard are  true: he  has indeed arisen again and left
his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the  Dark Tower
of Mordor. That name even  you  hobbits have heard of, like a  shadow on the
borders of  old  stories. Always after a  defeat and a  respite, the  Shadow
takes another shape and grows again.'
'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo.
'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But
