No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.
He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;
He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars appear,
As gems upon a silver thread,
Above the shadow of his head.
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:
The world was fair in Durin's Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver floor,
And runes of power upon the door.
The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lamps of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,
And metal wrought like fishes' mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin's folk
Beneath the mountains music woke:
The harpers harped, the minstrels sang,
And at the gates the trumpets rang.
The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge's fire is ashen-cold
No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:
The darkness dwells in Durin's halls
The shadow lies upon his tomb
In Moria, in Khazad-dym.
But still the sunken stars appear
In dark and windless Mirrormere;
There lies his crown in water deep,
Till Durin wakes again from sleep.
`I like  that! ' said Sam. `I  should  like  to learn it.       In Moria,  in
Khazad-dym!        But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking  of all  those
lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still? '
Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more.
`Piles  of jewels? ' said  Gandalf. `No. The Orcs have often  plundered
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled,
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they
are drowned in water--or in a shadow of fear.'
`Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? ' asked Sam.
'For  mithril ,' answered  Gandalf. `The  wealth of Moria was not in gold
and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things
they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delve
for  them:  all things that they  desired they could obtain in  traffic. For
here alone in the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some  have
called it:  mithril   is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do
not tell. Its worth was  ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price;
for little is left above  ground, and even the Orcs dare not  delve here for
it. The lodes lead away  north towards  Caradhras, and down to darkness. The
Dwarves  tell  no tale;  but  even as          mithril   was the  foundation of their
wealth, so  also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and  too
deep,  and disturbed that from which they fled,  Durin's  Bane. Of what they
brought to light the Orcs  have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute
to Sauron, who covets it.
` Mithril!   All  folk desired it.  It could be  beaten  like copper, and
polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet
harder  than tempered steel. Its beauty  was like to  that of common silver,
but  the  beauty  of     mithril   did not tarnish  or grow dim.  The Elves dearly
loved it, and among many uses they  made of it               ithildin  , starmoon, which you
saw  upon  the doors. Bilbo had a  corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust  still in Michel Delving
Mathom-house, I suppose.'
`What?  ' cried  Gimli,  startled  out of  his  silence. `A  corslet of
Moria-silver? That was a kingly gift! '
'Yes,' said  Gandalf. `I never told him, but its worth was greater than
the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.'
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt
no doubt that Bilbo knew quite  well.  It was indeed a kingly gift. But  now
his thoughts  had been carried away  from the dark  Mines, to  Rivendell, to
Bilbo,  and to Bag  End in  the days while Bilbo was  still there. He wished
with  all his  heart  that he was back  there, and in those days, mowing the
lawn, or pottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard  of Moria,
or  mithril --  or the Ring.
A deep silence fell.  One by one the others  fell  asleep. Frodo was on
guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors  out of deep
places,  dread  came  over him. His hands were cold  and his  brow  damp. He
listened. All his mind was given to listening and  nothing else for two slow
hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall.
His  watch  was nearly over, when, far  off  where he guessed  that the
western  archway stood,  he  fancied  that he could  see two pale points  of
light, almost  like  luminous eyes. He started. His head had nodded. `I must
have  nearly fallen asleep on guard,' he thought. `I  was on  the edge  of a
dream.' He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into
the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas.
When he lay down  he quickly went to  sleep, but  it seemed to him that
the  dream went on: he  heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of light
approaching, slowly. He woke and  found that the others were speaking softly
near him, and that a  dim light  was falling on his face. High  up above the
eastern  archway through a shaft near  the roof came  a long pale gleam; and
across the hall  through  the  northern  arch light also glimmered faint and
