polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet
harder  than tempered steel. Its beauty  was like to  that of common silver,
but  the  beauty  of     mithril   did not tarnish  or grow dim.  The Elves dearly
loved it, and among many uses they  made of it               ithildin  , starmoon, which you
saw  upon  the doors. Bilbo had a  corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust  still in Michel Delving
Mathom-house, I suppose.'
`What?  ' cried  Gimli,  startled  out of  his  silence. `A  corslet of
Moria-silver? That was a kingly gift! '
'Yes,' said  Gandalf. `I never told him, but its worth was greater than
the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.'
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt
no doubt that Bilbo knew quite  well.  It was indeed a kingly gift. But  now
his thoughts  had been carried away  from the dark  Mines, to  Rivendell, to
Bilbo,  and to Bag  End in  the days while Bilbo was  still there. He wished
with  all his  heart  that he was back  there, and in those days, mowing the
lawn, or pottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard  of Moria,
or  mithril --  or the Ring.
A deep silence fell.  One by one the others  fell  asleep. Frodo was on
guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors  out of deep
places,  dread  came  over him. His hands were cold  and his  brow  damp. He
listened. All his mind was given to listening and  nothing else for two slow
hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall.
His  watch  was nearly over, when, far  off  where he guessed  that the
western  archway stood,  he  fancied  that he could  see two pale points  of
light, almost  like  luminous eyes. He started. His head had nodded. `I must
have  nearly fallen asleep on guard,' he thought. `I  was on  the edge  of a
dream.' He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into
the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas.
When he lay down  he quickly went to  sleep, but  it seemed to him that
the  dream went on: he  heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of light
approaching, slowly. He woke and  found that the others were speaking softly
near him, and that a  dim light  was falling on his face. High  up above the
eastern  archway through a shaft near  the roof came  a long pale gleam; and
across the hall  through  the  northern  arch light also glimmered faint and
distantly.
Frodo sat up. `Good morning!  ' said  Gandalf: `For morning it is again
at last. I was right,  you see.  We  are high up on the east  side of Moria.
Before today is over we ought to find the Great  Gates and see the waters of
Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.'
'I shall be glad,' said Gimli. `I have looked on  Moria, and it is very
great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no  sign of my
kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.'
After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at  once. `We
are tired, but we shall rest better  when we are outside,' he said. `I think
that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.'
`No indeed! '  said Boromir. `Which way shall we take?  Yonder eastward
arch? '
'Maybe,' said  Gandalf. `But  I du not know yet exactly  where  we are.
Unless I am quite astray, I guess that  we are above and to the north of the
Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The
eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before
we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light
in the north door. If we could find a window it would help,  but I fear that
the light comes only down deep shafts.'
Following  his  lead the Company  passed under the  northern arch. They
found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the  glimmer grew
stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway on their right. It was
high and flat-topped, and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing
half open.  Beyond it was a large square  chamber. It was  dimly lit, but to
their eyes, after so long  a time in the dark, it seemed dazzlingly  bright,
and they blinked as they entered.
Their  feet  disturbed  a deep dust upon the floor,  and stumbled among
things  lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at first  make out.
The chamber was lit  by a  wide shaft high in the  further  eastern wall; it
slanted  upwards and, far  above,  a small square patch of blue sky could be
seen. The light of the  shaft fell directly  on a table in the middle of the
room:  a single  oblong block, about two  feet high,  upon  which was laid a
great slab of white stone.
`It  looks  like  a tomb,' muttered  Frodo,  and  bent forwards with  a
curious  sense  of foreboding,  to  look more  closely  at it.  Gandalf came
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:
'These  are Daeron's Runes,  such as were used  of  old in Moria,' said
Gandalf. 'Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria.'
'He  is  dead then,' said  Frodo. `I feared it was  so.' Gimli cast his
hood over his face.
