stand.'
`Well, I can read no more for a long way,'  said  Gandalf, 'except  the
word    gold  , and  Durin's Axe     and something       helm  . Then    Balin is now  lord of
Moria   . That seems to  end a  chapter. After some  stars another hand begins,
and I can see    we found  truesilver      ,  and  later the word     wellforged     and then
something, I have it!      mithril  ; and  the last two  lines     Uin to  seek for the
upper  armouries of  Third  Deep           ,  something    go westwards      , a blur,  to Hollin
gate  .'
Gandalf paused and set a few leaves  aside. 'There are several pages of
the same sort, rather hastily  written and much damaged, he said; `but I can
make little of  them in  this light.  Now  there must  be a number of leaves
missing, because they  begin  to  be numbered                five ,  the fifth year  of the
colony,  I suppose. Let  me see! No, they  are too cut and stained; I cannot
read them. We might do  better  in the sunlight.  Wait! Here is something: a
large bold hand using an Elvish script.'
'That would be Ori's hand,' said Gimli, looking  over the wizard's arm.
`He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.'
`I  fear  he had  ill tidings to record in a  fair hand,' said Gandalf.
'The first clear word is      sorrow   , but the rest of the line is lost, unless it
ends in   estre . Yes, it  must  be     yestre   followed by     day being  the tenth of
novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone  to look in
Mirror mere.  an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, hut many
more  ... up  from  east up  the Silverlode         . The remainder of the page is so
blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think  I can read                  we have
barred the gates     , and then   can  hold them long if      , and then perhaps      horrible
and   suffer  . Poor Balin! He seems to have kept  the  title that he  took for
less than five years. I wonder  what happened afterwards;  but there  is  no
time to  puzzle  out the last few pages. Here  is the last page of  all.' He
paused and sighed.
`It  is grim reading,' he said. 'I fear their end was cruel. Listen!            We
cannot get  out.  We cannot get out. They have  taken the  Bridge and second
hall. Frbr and Luni and  Nbli fell there          . Then there are four lines  smeared
so  that I can only     read went 5 days  ago       . The last lines   run the pool is up
to  the wall  at Westgate. The Watcher in  the Water took Uin. We cannot get
out. The  end comes       , and then    drums, drums in the deep        . I wonder what  that
means. The last thing written is in a  trailing  scrawl of elf-letters:              they
are coming     .  There is  nothing more.'  Gandalf paused  and stood  in  silent
thought.
A sudden dread and a horror  of  the chamber fell on  the  Company. `                   We
cannot get out    ,' muttered Gimli. 'It was  well for us that the pool had sunk
a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.'
Gandalf raised  his  head and  looked  round. `They seem to have made a
last  stand by both doors,'  he  said; 'but there were not many left by that
time. So ended the  attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The
time is not come yet. Now,  I fear, we must say  farewell  to  Balin  son of
Fundin.  Here  he must  lie in the halls of his  fathers.  We will take this
book,  the Book  of Mazarbul, and look at  it  more  closely  later. You had
better keep it, Gimli, and take it  back  to Dbin, if  you get a chance.  It
will interest him, though it will grieve  him deeply. Come, let  us  go! The
morning is passing.'
'Which way shall we go? ' asked Boromir.
'Back to the hall,' answered  Gandalf. 'But  our visit to this room has
not been  in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, the
Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end.
Therefore we  should leave by  the  eastern arch of the hall, and bear right
and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first  Hall should be on the Seventh
Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!
'
Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great noise: a
rolling   Boom     that seemed  to come  from depths far below, and to tremble in
the stone at their feet. They sprang towards  the door  in alarm.                Doom, doom
it rolled  again, as  if huge  hands were turning the very caverns  of Moria
into a vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great  horn  was blown
in  the hall,  and answering horns  and harsh cries  were heard further off.
There was a hurrying sound of many feet.
`They are coming! ' cried Legolas.
'We cannot get out,' said Gimli.
`Trapped! ' cried Gandalf. `Why  did I delay? Here we are, caught, just
as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what ----'
Doom, doom      came the drum-beat and the walls shook.
'Slam the doors and wedge them! ' shouted Aragorn. 'And keep your packs
on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.'
`No! ' said Gandalf. 'We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar!
We will go that way, if we get a chance.'
Another  harsh  horn-call and shrill cries  rang out.  Feet were coming
down the corridor.  There was a  ring and clatter  as the Company drew their
swords. Glamdring shone  with a  pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges.
Boromir set his shoulder against the western door.
`Wait a  moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He sprang forward
to Boromir's side and drew himself up to his full height.
'Who  comes hither  to disturb the rest of  Balin Lord of Moria?  '  he
cried in a loud voice.
There was a  rush of  hoarse laughter, like the fall  of sliding stones
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command. Doom,
boom,
doom went the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before  the narrow opening of the
door and thrust forward his staff:  There was a dazzling flash that  lit the
chamber  and the  passage  outside. For an instant  the wizard  looked  out.
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back.
'There are  Orcs, very many of them,' he said. `And some are  large and
evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there
is something else there. A great  cave-troll,  I  think,  or more than  one.
There is no hope of escape that way.'
'And no hope at all, if they  come at the other  door  as  well,'  said
Boromir.
'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing by
the eastern door listening. `The passage on  this side plunges straight down
a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall. But it  is  no good
flying blindly  this way with the  pursuit  just behind. We cannot block the
door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it  opens inwards. We must
do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of
Mazarbul!' he said grimly feeling the edge of his sword, And®ril.
Heavy feet  were  heard in the corridor. Boromir  flung himself against
the door  and heaved it to; then  he wedged it  with broken sword-blades and
splinters of wood. The Company retreated  to the other  side of the chamber.
But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a blow on the door that made it
quiver;  and then it began  to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A
huge  arm and shoulder, with  a  dark skin of  greenish scales,  was  thrust
through  the  widening  gap.  Then a  great,  flat,  toeless foot was forced
through below. There was a dead silence outside.
