Another  harsh  horn-call and shrill cries  rang out.  Feet were coming
down the corridor.  There was a  ring and clatter  as the Company drew their
swords. Glamdring shone  with a  pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges.
Boromir set his shoulder against the western door.
`Wait a  moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He sprang forward
to Boromir's side and drew himself up to his full height.
'Who  comes hither  to disturb the rest of  Balin Lord of Moria?  '  he
cried in a loud voice.
There was a  rush of  hoarse laughter, like the fall  of sliding stones
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command. Doom,
boom,
doom went the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before  the narrow opening of the
door and thrust forward his staff:  There was a dazzling flash that  lit the
chamber  and the  passage  outside. For an instant  the wizard  looked  out.
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back.
'There are  Orcs, very many of them,' he said. `And some are  large and
evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there
is something else there. A great  cave-troll,  I  think,  or more than  one.
There is no hope of escape that way.'
'And no hope at all, if they  come at the other  door  as  well,'  said
Boromir.
'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing by
the eastern door listening. `The passage on  this side plunges straight down
a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall. But it  is  no good
flying blindly  this way with the  pursuit  just behind. We cannot block the
door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it  opens inwards. We must
do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of
Mazarbul!' he said grimly feeling the edge of his sword, And®ril.
Heavy feet  were  heard in the corridor. Boromir  flung himself against
the door  and heaved it to; then  he wedged it  with broken sword-blades and
splinters of wood. The Company retreated  to the other  side of the chamber.
But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a blow on the door that made it
quiver;  and then it began  to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A
huge  arm and shoulder, with  a  dark skin of  greenish scales,  was  thrust
through  the  widening  gap.  Then a  great,  flat,  toeless foot was forced
through below. There was a dead silence outside.
Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but his
sword  rang, glanced  aside, and  fell  from his shaken  hand. The blade was
notched.
Suddenly, and to his  own surprise, Frodo  felt a hot wrath blaze up in
his heart. `The Shire! ' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped,
and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot
jerked back, nearly  wrenching  Sting from Frodo's arm.  Black drops dripped
from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir  hurled  himself against the
door and slammed it again.
`One for the Shire! '  cried  Aragorn. `The hobbit's bite is  deep! You
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo! '
There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams  and
hammers were  beating against it.  It cracked  and staggered  back,  and the
opening grew  suddenly  wide.  Arrows  came  whistling  in, but  struck  the
northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the floor. There  was a horn-blast and
a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber.
How many there were the Company could  not count. The affray was sharp,
but the orcs were dismayed by the fierceness of  the  defence. Legolas  shot
two  through the throat.  Gimli hewed the legs from  under another that  had
sprung up on Balin's  tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thirteen
had
fallen the rest fled shrieking. leaving the  defenders unharmed, except  for
Sam who had  a scratch along the scalp.  A  quick duck had saved him; and he
had  felled  his  orc:  a sturdy  thrust with his  Barrow-blade. A  fire was
smouldering  in his  brown  eyes  that would  have  made  Ted Sandyman  step
backwards, if he had seen it.
`Now  is  the  time! ' cried  Gandalf.  `Let us  go,  before the  troll
returns!'
But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the
stair  outside,  a  huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black  mail
from  head  to foot,  leaped  into  the chamber;  behind  him his  followers
clustered in the doorway. His broad flat  face was swart, his eyes were like
coals, and  his tongue  was red; he wielded a great  spear. With a thrust of
his  huge hide shield he  turned  Boromir's  sword  and  bore him backwards,
throwing him to  the ground. Diving under Aragorn's blow with the speed of a
striking  snake  he  charged  into  the Company  and  thrust with  his spear
straight  at  Frodo.  The blow caught  him  on the right side, and Frodo was
hurled  against  the  wall and  pinned.  Sam,  with  a  cry, hacked  at  the
spear-shaft, and it broke. But  even as the orc flung down the truncheon and
swept  out his scimitar, And®ril came down upon his helm. There  was a flash
like flame and the helm burst  asunder.  The orc fell with cloven  head. His
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them.
Doom, doom      went  the drums  in the  deep.  The  great voice  rolled out
again.
'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! '
Aragorn picked up Frodo  where  he lay by the  wall and  made  for  the
stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in  front  of him. The others followed;  but
Gimli had  to be dragged away  by Legolas: in spite of the peril he lingered
by  Balin's tomb  with his head bowed.  Boromir hauled the eastern  door to,
grinding upon its hinges: it  had great iron rings on either side, but could
not be fastened.
'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. `I can walk. Put me down! '
Aragorn nearly dropped him in his  amazement. 'I thought you were dead!
' he cried.
'Not yet! '  said Gandalf. 'But there is time  for wonder.  Off you go,
all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if
I  do  not come soon, go on!  Go  quickly and choose paths leading right and
downwards.'
'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! ' said Aragorn.
`Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely.  `Swords are no  more use  here.
Go!'
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their
way down  a long  flight  of steps, and then looked back; but they could see
nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer  of the wizard's staff. He
seemed  to  be still  standing on guard by  the closed door.  Frodo breathed
heavily  and  leaned  against Sam, who  put his arms  about him.  They stood
peering up  the  stairs  into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear  the
voice of  Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with
a sighing  echo. He could not catch  what was said.  The  walls seemed to be
trembling.  Every  now and again the drum-beats  throbbed and rolled:                       doom,
doom   .
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white  light. Then
there  was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke  out wildly:
