hurled  against  the  wall and  pinned.  Sam,  with  a  cry, hacked  at  the
spear-shaft, and it broke. But  even as the orc flung down the truncheon and
swept  out his scimitar, And®ril came down upon his helm. There  was a flash
like flame and the helm burst  asunder.  The orc fell with cloven  head. His
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them.
Doom, doom      went  the drums  in the  deep.  The  great voice  rolled out
again.
'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! '
Aragorn picked up Frodo  where  he lay by the  wall and  made  for  the
stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in  front  of him. The others followed;  but
Gimli had  to be dragged away  by Legolas: in spite of the peril he lingered
by  Balin's tomb  with his head bowed.  Boromir hauled the eastern  door to,
grinding upon its hinges: it  had great iron rings on either side, but could
not be fastened.
'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. `I can walk. Put me down! '
Aragorn nearly dropped him in his  amazement. 'I thought you were dead!
' he cried.
'Not yet! '  said Gandalf. 'But there is time  for wonder.  Off you go,
all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if
I  do  not come soon, go on!  Go  quickly and choose paths leading right and
downwards.'
'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! ' said Aragorn.
`Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely.  `Swords are no  more use  here.
Go!'
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their
way down  a long  flight  of steps, and then looked back; but they could see
nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer  of the wizard's staff. He
seemed  to  be still  standing on guard by  the closed door.  Frodo breathed
heavily  and  leaned  against Sam, who  put his arms  about him.  They stood
peering up  the  stairs  into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear  the
voice of  Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with
a sighing  echo. He could not catch  what was said.  The  walls seemed to be
trembling.  Every  now and again the drum-beats  throbbed and rolled:                       doom,
doom   .
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white  light. Then
there  was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke  out wildly:
doom-boom, doom-boom            , and then  stopped. Gandalf came flying down the
steps
and fell to the ground in the midst of the Company.
`Well, well! That's over!  ' said the wizard struggling to his feet. `I
have done  all that I  could. But I have met my  match, and have nearly been
destroyed. But don't stand here! Go  on! You  will have to  do without light
for a  while: I am rather  shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are  you, Gimli? Come
ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!'
They stumbled after him  wondering what had happened.                     Doom,  doom
went
the drum-beats  again: they now sounded muffled and  far away, but they were
following. There was no  other sound  of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor
any  voice. Gandalf took  no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed to
be  going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended
a  flight of steps, fifty or more, to a  lower level. At the moment that was
their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they
came on it, and put their feet out into  emptiness.  Gandalf felt the ground
with his staff like a blind man.
At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and
had descended many flights of stairs. There was still  no sound  of pursuit.
Almost  they  began to hope that they  would  escape. At the  bottom  of the
seventh flight Gandalf halted.
`It is getting hot! ' he  gasped. `We ought to  be down at least to the
level of the Gates now.  Soon I think we should look for a left-hand turn to
take us  east. I  hope  it is not far. I am very weary. I  must  rest here a
moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.'
Gimli took  his arm and  helped  him down to a seat on the step.  `What
happened away up there at the  door? ' he asked. `Did you meet the beater of
the drums? '
'I  do not know,' answered Gandalf. `But I found myself suddenly  faced
by something  that I have not met before. I could think of nothing to do but
to try and  put a  shutting-spell on the door. I know many; but to do things
of that kind rightly requires time,  and even then the door can be broken by
strength.
`As  I stood there  I could hear orc-voices on  the other  side: at any
moment  I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear  what was said;
they seemed to be talking in their  own hideous language.  All  I caught was
ghvsh;     that is  "fire". Then something came into the chamber  --  I felt it
through  the door, and the orcs themselves were  afraid and fell  silent. It
laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and my spell.
'What it was  I cannot guess, but I have  never felt such  a challenge.
The counter-spell was  terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door
left  my control and began to open!  I had  to speak a word of Command. That
proved too great a strain.  The door burst in pieces.  Something  dark  as a
cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down
the stairs. All the wall gave way, and  the roof of  the  chamber as well, I
think.
`I  am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something  else is buried
there too. I  cannot say. But at least the passage behind  us was completely
blocked.  Ah! I have never  felt  so spent, but it  is passing. And now what
about  you, Frodo? There was not time to say  so, but I have never been more
delighted in my life than when you spoke.  I feared that it was  a brave but
dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.'
`What about me?  ' said  Frodo. 'I am  alive,  and whole I think. I  am
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.'
`Well,' said Aragorn, `I can only say that hobbits are made of  a stuff
so tough  that I  have  never met the like of it. Had  I known, I would have
spoken softer in the  Inn at  Bree! That spear-thrust would have  skewered a
wild boar! '
'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad  to say,'  said Frodo; `though I
feel  as  if I had been caught between  a hammer  and an anvil.' He  said no
more. He found breathing painful.
'You take  after Bilbo,' said  Gandalf.  `There is  more about you than
meets the  eye, as I said  of  him long ago.'  Frodo wondered  if the remark
meant more than it said.
They  now went  on again. Before long Gimli spoke.  He had keen eyes in
the dark. `I think,' he said, `that there  is a light  ahead. But it  is not
daylight. It is red. What can it be? '
` Ghvsh! ' muttered  Gandalf. `I wonder if that is what they meant:  that
the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.'
Soon the light became  unmistakable,  and could be  seen by all. It was
flickering and glowing  on the walls away down the passage before them. They
could now see their way: in front the road sloped down swiftly, and some way
ahead there stood  a low archway; through it the glowing light came. The air
