ghvsh;     that is  "fire". Then something came into the chamber  --  I felt it
through  the door, and the orcs themselves were  afraid and fell  silent. It
laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and my spell.
'What it was  I cannot guess, but I have  never felt such  a challenge.
The counter-spell was  terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door
left  my control and began to open!  I had  to speak a word of Command. That
proved too great a strain.  The door burst in pieces.  Something  dark  as a
cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down
the stairs. All the wall gave way, and  the roof of  the  chamber as well, I
think.
`I  am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something  else is buried
there too. I  cannot say. But at least the passage behind  us was completely
blocked.  Ah! I have never  felt  so spent, but it  is passing. And now what
about  you, Frodo? There was not time to say  so, but I have never been more
delighted in my life than when you spoke.  I feared that it was  a brave but
dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.'
`What about me?  ' said  Frodo. 'I am  alive,  and whole I think. I  am
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.'
`Well,' said Aragorn, `I can only say that hobbits are made of  a stuff
so tough  that I  have  never met the like of it. Had  I known, I would have
spoken softer in the  Inn at  Bree! That spear-thrust would have  skewered a
wild boar! '
'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad  to say,'  said Frodo; `though I
feel  as  if I had been caught between  a hammer  and an anvil.' He  said no
more. He found breathing painful.
'You take  after Bilbo,' said  Gandalf.  `There is  more about you than
meets the  eye, as I said  of  him long ago.'  Frodo wondered  if the remark
meant more than it said.
They  now went  on again. Before long Gimli spoke.  He had keen eyes in
the dark. `I think,' he said, `that there  is a light  ahead. But it  is not
daylight. It is red. What can it be? '
` Ghvsh! ' muttered  Gandalf. `I wonder if that is what they meant:  that
the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.'
Soon the light became  unmistakable,  and could be  seen by all. It was
flickering and glowing  on the walls away down the passage before them. They
could now see their way: in front the road sloped down swiftly, and some way
ahead there stood  a low archway; through it the glowing light came. The air
became very hot.
When they came to the  arch  Gandalf  went through,  signing to them to
wait.  As  he  stood just beyond the opening they saw his face  lit by a red
glow. Quickly he stepped back.
`There is some new devilry here,' he said, 'devised for our welcome  no
doubt.  But I know now  where we are:  we  have reached the First Deep,  the
level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and
the Gates are near: away beyond  the eastern end, on the left, not more than
a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair,  along a wide road
through the First Hall, and out! But come and look! '
They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was loftier
and far  longer than the one in which they had  slept. They  were  near  its
eastern  end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down the  centre stalked a
double line of towering pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees
whose boughs upheld  the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems
were smooth and black, but a  red glow was  darkly mirrored  in their sides.
Right  across the  floor, close  to the feet  of two  huge  pillars  a great
fissure  had opened. Out of it a fierce  red light came,  and  now and again
flames licked  at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps
of dark smoke wavered in the hot air.
'If we had come by  the  main road down from the upper halls, we should
have been trapped here,' said Gandalf.  `Let  us hope that the fire now lies
between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.'
Even as he  spoke they heard again  the pursuing drum-beat:                  Doom, doom,
doom   .  Away  beyond the  shadows  at the western end of the  hall there came
cries  and  horn-calls.     Doom,  doom       :  the pillars seemed  to tremble and the
flames to quiver.
`Now for the  last race! ' said Gandalf. 'If the sun is shining outside
we may still escape. After me! '
He  turned left  and  sped  across the smooth  floor of the  hall.  The
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the beat and
echo  of  many  hurrying feet behind.  A shrill  yell went up: they had been
seen. There was a  ring and clash of steel. An arrow  whistled over  Frodo's
head.
Boromir laughed. `They did not expect this,' he said. `The fire has cut
them off. We are on the wrong side! '
`Look ahead! ' called Gandalf. `The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and
narrow.'
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the
floor vanished and fell to an unknown  depth. The outer door  could only  be
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the
chasm with one curving  spring  of fifty feet. It was  an ancient defence of
the Dwarves against  any enemy that  might  capture  the  First Hall and the
outer passages. They  could only pass across it in single file. At the brink
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind.
'Lead  the way,  Gimli! ' he said. 'Pippin and  Merry next. Straight on
and up the stair beyond the door! '
Arrows  fell  among them. One  struck Frodo  and  sprang  back. Another
pierced Gandalf's hat  and stuck there  like a black feather.  Frodo  looked
behind. Beyond  the fire  he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to  be
hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and scimitars which  shone  red  as
blood in the firelight.     Doom, doom        rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and
louder,   doom, doom      .
Legolas  turned and set an arrow to the  string, though it  was  a long
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slipped to
the ground. He  gave a cry of  dismay and  fear.  Two great trolls appeared;
they bore  great slabs  of stone, and flung  them down to serve as  gangways
over  the fire.  But  it was not the  trolls that  had filled the  Elf  with
terror. The  ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, as if they
themselves  were afraid.  Something was coming  up behind them.  What it was
could not be seen:  it was like a great shadow, in the middle of which was a
dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to
be in it and to go before it.
It came to the edge of the fire and the  light faded as if a cloud  had
bent  over it. Then with  a rush it leaped  across the fissure.  The  flames
roared up to greet  it, and  wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in
the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand
was  a  blade like a stabbing tongue of fire;  in its left it held a whip of
many thongs.
'Ai! ai! ' wailed Legolas. 'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! '
Gimli stared with wide eyes. `Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting his
axe fall he covered his face.
'A  Balrog,' muttered  Gandalf.  `Now I  understand.'  He  faltered and
leaned heavily on his staff. `What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.'
