narrow.'
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the
floor vanished and fell to an unknown  depth. The outer door  could only  be
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the
chasm with one curving  spring  of fifty feet. It was  an ancient defence of
the Dwarves against  any enemy that  might  capture  the  First Hall and the
outer passages. They  could only pass across it in single file. At the brink
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind.
'Lead  the way,  Gimli! ' he said. 'Pippin and  Merry next. Straight on
and up the stair beyond the door! '
Arrows  fell  among them. One  struck Frodo  and  sprang  back. Another
pierced Gandalf's hat  and stuck there  like a black feather.  Frodo  looked
behind. Beyond  the fire  he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to  be
hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and scimitars which  shone  red  as
blood in the firelight.     Doom, doom        rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and
louder,   doom, doom      .
Legolas  turned and set an arrow to the  string, though it  was  a long
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slipped to
the ground. He  gave a cry of  dismay and  fear.  Two great trolls appeared;
they bore  great slabs  of stone, and flung  them down to serve as  gangways
over  the fire.  But  it was not the  trolls that  had filled the  Elf  with
terror. The  ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, as if they
themselves  were afraid.  Something was coming  up behind them.  What it was
could not be seen:  it was like a great shadow, in the middle of which was a
dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to
be in it and to go before it.
It came to the edge of the fire and the  light faded as if a cloud  had
bent  over it. Then with  a rush it leaped  across the fissure.  The  flames
roared up to greet  it, and  wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in
the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand
was  a  blade like a stabbing tongue of fire;  in its left it held a whip of
many thongs.
'Ai! ai! ' wailed Legolas. 'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! '
Gimli stared with wide eyes. `Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting his
axe fall he covered his face.
'A  Balrog,' muttered  Gandalf.  `Now I  understand.'  He  faltered and
leaned heavily on his staff. `What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.'
The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. The orcs yelled
and  poured over the stone gangways.  Then Boromir raised his horn and blew.
Loud  the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many  throats under
the  cavernous  roof. For a  moment the orcs  quailed  and the  fiery shadow
halted.  Then the  echoes died as suddenly as  a  flame blown out by a  dark
wind, and the enemy advanced again.
'Over the bridge!' cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. `Fly! This is
a foe beyond any  of you. I  must hold the narrow  way.  Fly! '  Aragorn and
Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side,
behind Gandalf at the  far end of the bridge. The others halted  just within
the doorway  at the hall's end, and turned, unable to leave their  leader to
face the enemy alone.
The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span,
leaning on  the staff  in his left hand,  but  in his other  hand  Glamdring
gleamed,  cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow
about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongs
whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm.
`You cannot  pass,' he  said. The  orcs stood still, and a dead silence
fell. `I  am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You
cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udyn. Go back to the
Shadow! You cannot pass.'
The  Balrog made  no  answer.  The fire in  it seemed to die,  but  the
darkness grew. It  stepped forward slowly on to  the bridge, and suddenly it
drew  itself  up to a  great height, and its wings were spread from wall  to
wall;  but still Gandalf could  be seen,  glimmering in the gloom; he seemed
small, and altogether alone: grey  and bent, like a  wizened tree before the
onset of a storm.
From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming.
Glamdring glittered white in answer.
There was a ringing clash and  a stab  of  white fire. The Balrog  fell
back  and its  sword flew  up in molten  fragments. The wizard swayed on the
bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still.
'You cannot pass! ' he said.
With a bound the  Balrog leaped full  upon the bridge. Its whip whirled
and hissed.
'He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the
bridge. ' Elendil!   ' he shouted. 'I am with you, Gandalf! '
`Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf  lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the
bridge  before  him.  The  staff broke asunder and  fell  from  his  hand. A
blinding sheet of white  flame sprang  up. The  bridge cracked. Right at the
Balrog's  feet it broke, and the stone  upon which it stood crashed into the
gulf,  while the  rest  remained, poised,  quivering  like a tongue  of rock
thrust out into emptiness.
With  a terrible  cry the Balrog fell  forward, and  its shadow plunged
down and vanished.  But  even as it  fell it swung  its whip, and the thongs
lashed and curled  about the wizard's  knees, dragging him to the brink.  He
staggered  and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid  into the  abyss.
'Fly, you fools! ' he cried, and was gone.
The fires went  out, and blank darkness  fell. The Company stood rooted
with  horror staring  into the pit. Even  as Aragorn and Boromir came flying
back, the rest  of the bridge cracked and  fell.  With a  cry Aragorn roused
them.
'Come!  I  will lead you now!  '  he  called.  'We  must  obey his last
command. Follow me! '
They  stumbled  wildly  up the great stairs beyond  the  door.  Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the  rear. At the top was a  wide echoing passage. Along
this they  fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that
he himself was  weeping as  he ran.           Doom, doom,  doom          the  drum-beats rolled
behind, mournful now and slow;             doom!
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof.
They ran  swifter. They passed into  a  hall, bright with daylight from  its
high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors
they passed,  and  suddenly before  them the Great Gates opened,  an arch of
blazing light.
There  was a guard of  orcs crouching in the  shadows behind the  great
door posts towering on either  side,  but the gates were shattered and  cast
down.  Aragorn smote to the ground the  captain that stood  in his path, and
the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept  past them  and took
no  heed  of them.  Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down  the  huge and
age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on
their faces.
They did not  halt  until  they were  out  of bowshot from  the  walls.
