`Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf  lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the
bridge  before  him.  The  staff broke asunder and  fell  from  his  hand. A
blinding sheet of white  flame sprang  up. The  bridge cracked. Right at the
Balrog's  feet it broke, and the stone  upon which it stood crashed into the
gulf,  while the  rest  remained, poised,  quivering  like a tongue  of rock
thrust out into emptiness.
With  a terrible  cry the Balrog fell  forward, and  its shadow plunged
down and vanished.  But  even as it  fell it swung  its whip, and the thongs
lashed and curled  about the wizard's  knees, dragging him to the brink.  He
staggered  and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid  into the  abyss.
'Fly, you fools! ' he cried, and was gone.
The fires went  out, and blank darkness  fell. The Company stood rooted
with  horror staring  into the pit. Even  as Aragorn and Boromir came flying
back, the rest  of the bridge cracked and  fell.  With a  cry Aragorn roused
them.
'Come!  I  will lead you now!  '  he  called.  'We  must  obey his last
command. Follow me! '
They  stumbled  wildly  up the great stairs beyond  the  door.  Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the  rear. At the top was a  wide echoing passage. Along
this they  fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that
he himself was  weeping as  he ran.           Doom, doom,  doom          the  drum-beats rolled
behind, mournful now and slow;             doom!
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof.
They ran  swifter. They passed into  a  hall, bright with daylight from  its
high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors
they passed,  and  suddenly before  them the Great Gates opened,  an arch of
blazing light.
There  was a guard of  orcs crouching in the  shadows behind the  great
door posts towering on either  side,  but the gates were shattered and  cast
down.  Aragorn smote to the ground the  captain that stood  in his path, and
the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept  past them  and took
no  heed  of them.  Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down  the  huge and
age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on
their faces.
They did not  halt  until  they were  out  of bowshot from  the  walls.
Dimrill  Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon it,
but  eastwards there was a golden  light  on the land.  It was but one  hour
after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were white and high.
They looked  back.  Dark yawned  the  archway  of  the Gates  under the
mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow drum-beats:
doom   . A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was to be seen; the  dale
all  around was empty.         Doom    . Grief  at last  wholly overcame them, and they
wept long: some standing and silent, some  cast upon the ground.                    Doom, doom       .
The drum-beats faded.
Chapter 6. Lothlurien
'Alas! I  Fear  we cannot  stay here longer,'  said  Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held up his sword. `Farewell, Gandalf! ' he cried.
'Did I  not say to you:      if  you pass the doors of Moria, beware           ? Alas that I
spoke true! What hope have we without you? '
He turned to the Company. `We must do without hope,' he said. `At least
we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no more! Come! We
have
a long road, and much to do.'
They rose and looked about  them. Northward the dale ran up into a glen
of shadows between  two great arms of the mountains, above which three white
peaks were shining:  Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria.
At the head of  the glen a torrent flowed  like a white lace over an endless
ladder  of short  falls,  and  a  mist of foam  hung in the  air  about  the
mountains' feet.
`Yonder is the Dimrill  Stair,'  said  Aragorn,  pointing to the falls.
'Down  the  deep-cloven way that climbs beside  the torrent  we should  have
come, if fortune had been kinder.'
`Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. `There he stands smiling in  the
sun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turned
away.
To the east the outflung arm of  the mountains marched to a sudden end,
and far lands  could be  descried beyond  them, wide and vague. To the south
the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than
a  mile away, and a  little below them, for they still stood high up on  the
west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a
great spear-head thrust  deep  into the northern glen; but its  southern end
was  beyond the  shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet  its  waters were dark: a
deep blue  like  clear evening sky seen from  a lamp-lit room. Its face  was
still and unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides
to its bare unbroken rim.
`There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zvram! ' said  Gimli sadly.  `I
remember that he said: "May you have joy of  the sight! But we cannot linger
there."  Now long shall I journey ere  I have  joy again. It is  I that must
