Chapter 6. Lothlurien
'Alas! I  Fear  we cannot  stay here longer,'  said  Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held up his sword. `Farewell, Gandalf! ' he cried.
'Did I  not say to you:      if  you pass the doors of Moria, beware           ? Alas that I
spoke true! What hope have we without you? '
He turned to the Company. `We must do without hope,' he said. `At least
we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no more! Come! We
have
a long road, and much to do.'
They rose and looked about  them. Northward the dale ran up into a glen
of shadows between  two great arms of the mountains, above which three white
peaks were shining:  Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria.
At the head of  the glen a torrent flowed  like a white lace over an endless
ladder  of short  falls,  and  a  mist of foam  hung in the  air  about  the
mountains' feet.
`Yonder is the Dimrill  Stair,'  said  Aragorn,  pointing to the falls.
'Down  the  deep-cloven way that climbs beside  the torrent  we should  have
come, if fortune had been kinder.'
`Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. `There he stands smiling in  the
sun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turned
away.
To the east the outflung arm of  the mountains marched to a sudden end,
and far lands  could be  descried beyond  them, wide and vague. To the south
the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than
a  mile away, and a  little below them, for they still stood high up on  the
west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a
great spear-head thrust  deep  into the northern glen; but its  southern end
was  beyond the  shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet  its  waters were dark: a
deep blue  like  clear evening sky seen from  a lamp-lit room. Its face  was
still and unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides
to its bare unbroken rim.
`There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zvram! ' said  Gimli sadly.  `I
remember that he said: "May you have joy of  the sight! But we cannot linger
there."  Now long shall I journey ere  I have  joy again. It is  I that must
hasten away, and he that must remain.'
The  Company now went down  the road from the Gates.  It was  rough and
broken,  fading to a winding track between heather and whin that thrust amid
the cracking stones. But still it could  be seen  that once long ago a great
paved way  had  wound upwards from  the lowlands of  the  Dwarf-kingdom.
In
places there were ruined works of stone beside the path, and mounds of green
topped with slender birches, or fir-trees sighing in  the wind. An  eastward
bend led them  hard by the sward of  Mirrormere,  and there not far from the
roadside stood a single column broken at the top.
'That  is Durin's Stone! ' cried Gimli. `I cannot  pass without turning
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale! '
`Be swift  then! ' said  Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.  `The
Sun sinks early. The Orcs will  not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we
must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will  be
dark tonight.'
'Come with me,  Frodo! ' cried the dwarf,  springing from the  road. `I
would not have  you  go without  seeing Kheled-zvram.'  He ran down the long
green slope. Frodo followed slowly,  drawn by the still blue water in  spite
of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind.
Beside  the  standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It  was cracked
and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon its side could not be read. `This
pillar marks the spot where Durin first looked  in the Mirrormere,' said the
dwarf. 'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!'
They stooped over the dark water. At first they could see nothing. Then
slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profound
blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above them; beyond there
was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting stars,
though sunlight was in  the sky above. Of their own stooping forms no shadow
could be seen.
'O Kheled-zvram fair and wonderful! ' said Gimli. `There lies the Crown
of Durin till he wakes.  Farewell! ' He bowed, and turned away, and hastened
back up the green-sward to the road again.
`What  did  you see?  '  said Pippin to Sam, but  Sam was  too deep  in
thought to answer.
The road now  turned south and went quickly downwards, running out from
between the arms of  the dale. Some  way  below the mere they came on a deep
well of water, clear as crystal,  from which a freshet fell over a stone lip
and ran glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel.
'Here is  the spring from  which the Silverlode rises.' said Gimli. `Do
not drink of it! It is icy cold.'
'Soon it becomes a swift river, and  it  gathers water from  many other
mountain-streams,' said Aragorn.  `Our road leads beside it for  many miles.
For I  shall take you  by the road that  Gandalf chose, and first I hope  to
come to  the woods  where  the  Silverlode  flows into the  Great  River-out
yonder.'  They looked as  he pointed,  and before  them  they  could see the
stream  leaping  down to the trough of the  valley, and then  running on and
away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden haze.
`There  lie  the  woods of Lothlurien! '  said  Legolas. `That  is  the
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees
of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not
till the  spring comes and  the  new green opens  do they fall, and then the
boughs are  laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the  wood is golden,
and golden is the  roof, and its  pillars are of silver, for the bark of the
trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would
be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! '
`My heart will be glad, even in the winter,' said Aragorn. 'But it lies
many miles away. Let us hasten! '
For some  time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with  the  others;  but
Aragorn was  leading them at  a great  pace,  and  after a while they lagged
behind.  They  had eaten nothing  since  the  early morning.  Sam's cut  was
burning like fire, and his head felt light.  In spite of the shining sun the
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria.  He shivered. Frodo felt
every step more painful and he gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing  them  now far behind,  he spoke  to
Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come
with him.
'I am sorry,  Frodo! ' he cried, full of concern. `So much has happened
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease
you,
as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after  us. Come now! A little
further on there is a place  where we can rest for a little. There I will do
what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.'
