seemed  to  form  the  letters of a flowing  script. They  shone  piercingly
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth.
I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice.
'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The  letters are Elvish,  of an ancient
mode, but the  language is that of Mordor, which I will  not utter here. But
this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.
It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:
Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.'
He  paused,  and  then  said  slowly in  a  deep voice:  'This  is  the
Master-ring, the One  Ring to rule them all.  This is the  One  Ring that he
lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of  his power. He greatly desires
it - but he must    not  get it.'
Frodo sat silent  and motionless.  Fear seemed  to stretch out  a  vast
hand, like a dark  cloud rising in the East and  looming  up  to engulf him.
'This ring!' he stammered. 'How, how on earth did it come to me?'
'Ah!' said Gandalf. 'That is a very long story. The beginnings lie back
in  the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If  I were to
tell  you all  that tale, we should still  be sitting  here when  Spring had
passed into Winter.
'But last  night  I told  you of Sauron the Great,  the Dark  Lord. The
rumours that you have  heard are  true: he  has indeed arisen again and left
his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the  Dark Tower
of Mordor. That name even  you  hobbits have heard of, like a  shadow on the
borders of  old  stories. Always after a  defeat and a  respite, the  Shadow
takes another shape and grows again.'
'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo.
'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But
that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the
time that  is given, us. And already, Frodo,  our  time is beginning to look
black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are  far from ripe,
I think, but  they are ripening. We shall be hard put to  it.  We  should be
very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance.
'The Enemy  still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to
beat down all resistance,  break the last defences, and cover  all the lands
in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring.
'The  Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid  from him, and  his hand
never touched  them or  sullied them. Seven the  Dwarf-kings possessed,  but
three he  has recovered,  and the others the  dragons have consumed. Nine he
gave  to  Mortal Men,  proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago  they
fell under  the dominion  of the One, and they became  Ringwraiths,  shadows
under  his  great Shadow, his most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a
year since the Nine walked abroad. Yet who  knows?  As the Shadow grows
once
more, they too may walk again. But  come!  We will not speak of such  things
even in the morning of the Shire.
'So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also,  or
else  they are  destroyed.  The Three are hidden still.  But that no  longer
troubles him. He only  needs the One; for he made  that Ring himself, it  is
his, and he let a great part of his  own former power pass  into it, so that
he could rule all the others.  If he recovers it, then he  will command them
all again, wherever they be,  even the Three, and  all that has been wrought
with them will be laid bare, and he will be stronger than ever.
'And this  is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the  One had
perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been  done. But he
knows now that it has        not  perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking
it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent  on it. It is his great hope and
our great fear.'
'Why,  why wasn't it destroyed?'  cried Frodo. 'And how  did  the Enemy
ever come to lose it, if  he  was so strong, and it was so precious to him?'
He  clutched  the Ring  in his hand,  as  if  he saw  already  dark  fingers
stretching out to seize it.
'It  was taken from him,' said Gandalf.  'The  strength of the Elves to
resist  him was greater long ago; and  not all Men were estranged from them.
The  Men of Westernesse  came  to their aid. That  is a  chapter of  ancient
history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and
gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain.
One day, perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in
full by one who knows it best.
'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how  this thing
came to  you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that  I will say. It
was Gil-galad,  Elven-king and Elendil  of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron,
though they themselves perished in the  deed; and Isildur Elendil's son  cut
the  Ring  from  Sauron's hand and  took  it  for his own.  Then  Sauron was
vanquished  and  his  spirit fled and was hidden for long  years,  until his
shadow took shape again in Mirkwood.
'But  the  Ring was lost. It fell  into  the Great  River, Anduin,  and
vanished. For Isildur was marching north  along the east banks of the River,
and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, and
almost all his folk  were slain. He leaped  into the waters,  but  the  Ring
slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and killed him
with arrows.'
Gandalf paused. 'And there in the dark pools amid the  Gladden Fields,'
he said, 'the Ring passed out  of knowledge and legend; and even so much  of
its history is known now  only to a few, and the Council of the  Wise  could
discover no more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think.
'Long  after, but  still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the
Great River  on  the edge of  Wilderland  a  clever-handed  and quiet-footed
little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the fathers of  the
fathers  of the Stoors, for they loved  the  River, and often swam in it, or
made  little  boats  of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute,
for it was  large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother
of  the  folk, stern  and  wise  in old lore,  such  as they  had. The  most
inquisitive and  curious-minded of that  family was called  Smjagol. He  was
interested in  roots and beginnings; he dived into  deep pools; he  burrowed
under  trees and  growing plants; he tunnelled  into green  mounds;  and  he
ceased to  look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or  the flowers
opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward.
'He had a  friend  called Djagol, of similar sort, sharper-eyed but not
so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the Gladden
Fields, where  there were  great beds  of  iris  and  flowering reeds. There
Smjagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Deal sat in the boat and
