well of water, clear as crystal,  from which a freshet fell over a stone lip
and ran glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel.
'Here is  the spring from  which the Silverlode rises.' said Gimli. `Do
not drink of it! It is icy cold.'
'Soon it becomes a swift river, and  it  gathers water from  many other
mountain-streams,' said Aragorn.  `Our road leads beside it for  many miles.
For I  shall take you  by the road that  Gandalf chose, and first I hope  to
come to  the woods  where  the  Silverlode  flows into the  Great  River-out
yonder.'  They looked as  he pointed,  and before  them  they  could see the
stream  leaping  down to the trough of the  valley, and then  running on and
away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden haze.
`There  lie  the  woods of Lothlurien! '  said  Legolas. `That  is  the
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees
of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not
till the  spring comes and  the  new green opens  do they fall, and then the
boughs are  laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the  wood is golden,
and golden is the  roof, and its  pillars are of silver, for the bark of the
trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would
be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! '
`My heart will be glad, even in the winter,' said Aragorn. 'But it lies
many miles away. Let us hasten! '
For some  time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with  the  others;  but
Aragorn was  leading them at  a great  pace,  and  after a while they lagged
behind.  They  had eaten nothing  since  the  early morning.  Sam's cut  was
burning like fire, and his head felt light.  In spite of the shining sun the
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria.  He shivered. Frodo felt
every step more painful and he gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing  them  now far behind,  he spoke  to
Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come
with him.
'I am sorry,  Frodo! ' he cried, full of concern. `So much has happened
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease
you,
as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after  us. Come now! A little
further on there is a place  where we can rest for a little. There I will do
what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.'
Soon afterwards they came  upon another stream that ran down  from  the
west, and joined  its  bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode. Together
they plunged over a fall of green-hued  stone, and foamed  down into a dell.
About  it stood fir-trees, short and bent,  and  its  sides were  steep  and
clothed with harts-tongue  and shrubs of whortle-berry. At the  bottom there
was  a level  space  through  which the stream flowed  noisily  over shining
pebbles. Here they rested.  It was now  nearly three hours  after noon,  and
they  had  come  only  a few  miles  from  the  Gates. Already  the sun  was
westering.
While Gimli and the two  younger hobbits kindled a  fire of brush-  and
fir-wood, and drew  water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was
not
deep, but  it looked ugly, and  Aragorn's face  was grave as he examined it.
After a moment he looked up with relief.
'Good luck, Sam! '  he said. 'Many  have received worse  than  this  in
payment for the slaying of their first orc. The  cut is not poisoned, as the
wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should  heal well when  I have tended
it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.'
He opened his pouch  and drew out  some withered leaves.  `They are dry
and some of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of the
leaves of   athelas    that I gathered near Weathertop. Crush  one in the  water,
and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! '
'I am all right,'  said Frodo, reluctant  to have his garments touched.
`AII I needed was some food and a little rest.'
`No! ' said Aragorn. `We must have a  look and see what the  hammer and
the  anvil have  done  to you. I still marvel  that  you are  alive at all.'
Gently he stripped off Frodo's old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of
wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered  before his eyes  like
the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it  off and held it up, and
the gems on it glittered like stars.  and the sound of the shaken rings  was
like the tinkle of rain in a pool.
`Look, my friends!' he called.  `Here's a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap an
elven-princeling in! If it were known that  hobbits had  such hides, all the
hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.'
`And all the arrows of all the hunters  in the world would be in vain,'
said  Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. `It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I
have never seen or  heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf
spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! '
`I have  often wondered what you and Bilbo  were doing, so close in his
little room,'  said Merry. 'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever.
I hope we get a chance of telling him about it! '
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast.
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored
and bruised where he had been hurled against the  wall. While the others set
the  food ready.  Aragorn  bathed the hurts  with water in which athelas was
steeped. The pungent fragrance filled  the dell, and all  those who  stooped
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the
pain leave him,  and his breath grew  easy: though he was stiff and sore  to
the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.
`The mail is marvellously light,' he said. `Put it on again, if you can
bear it. My heart is glad  to know that you have  such a coat. Do not lay it
aside, even  in sleep,  unless fortune brings you where you  are safe for  a
while; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.'
When they  had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They  put out the
fire and hid all  traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they  took  to
the  road  again.  They  had  not  gone far before the sun  sank  behind the
westward  heights  and  great  shadows crept down  the mountain-sides.  Dusk
veiled their  feet,  and  mist  rose in the hollows. Away  in  the east  the
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and
Frodo  now  feeling eased  and greatly refreshed were  able  to go at a fair
pace,  and  with only one brief halt Aragorn  led the Company on  for nearly
three more hours.
It was  dark. Deep night had fallen. There  were  many clear stars, hut
the fast-waning moon  would not be seen till late. Gimli  and  Frodo were at
the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound  upon the
road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence.
'Not a sound but the wind,' he  said. `There are no goblins near, or my
ears are made of wood. It is to be  hoped that the Orcs will be content with
driving us from Moria. And maybe that was  all their  purpose, and  they had
nothing else to do with us-with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes
for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.'
Frodo  did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade  was dull. Yet
he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the shadows had fallen
