spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! '
`I have  often wondered what you and Bilbo  were doing, so close in his
little room,'  said Merry. 'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever.
I hope we get a chance of telling him about it! '
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast.
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored
and bruised where he had been hurled against the  wall. While the others set
the  food ready.  Aragorn  bathed the hurts  with water in which athelas was
steeped. The pungent fragrance filled  the dell, and all  those who  stooped
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the
pain leave him,  and his breath grew  easy: though he was stiff and sore  to
the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.
`The mail is marvellously light,' he said. `Put it on again, if you can
bear it. My heart is glad  to know that you have  such a coat. Do not lay it
aside, even  in sleep,  unless fortune brings you where you  are safe for  a
while; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.'
When they  had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They  put out the
fire and hid all  traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they  took  to
the  road  again.  They  had  not  gone far before the sun  sank  behind the
westward  heights  and  great  shadows crept down  the mountain-sides.  Dusk
veiled their  feet,  and  mist  rose in the hollows. Away  in  the east  the
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and
Frodo  now  feeling eased  and greatly refreshed were  able  to go at a fair
pace,  and  with only one brief halt Aragorn  led the Company on  for nearly
three more hours.
It was  dark. Deep night had fallen. There  were  many clear stars, hut
the fast-waning moon  would not be seen till late. Gimli  and  Frodo were at
the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound  upon the
road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence.
'Not a sound but the wind,' he  said. `There are no goblins near, or my
ears are made of wood. It is to be  hoped that the Orcs will be content with
driving us from Moria. And maybe that was  all their  purpose, and  they had
nothing else to do with us-with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes
for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.'
Frodo  did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade  was dull. Yet
he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the shadows had fallen
about them and the  road behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter
of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams
of light behind, or for a moment he thought he  saw  them, but at once  they
slipped aside and vanished.
`What is it? ' said the dwarf.
`I don't know.' answered Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet,  and I thought
I saw a light-like  eyes. I  have thought so  often, since we first  entered
Moria.'
Gimli  halted and  stooped  to  the  ground. 'I  hear  nothing but  the
night-speech of plant  and stone,'  he said. 'Come! Let us hurry! The others
are out of sight.'
The  night-wind  blew  chill up the valley to  meet them. Before them a
wide  grey shadow loomed, and  they heard an endless  rustle of leaves  like
poplars in the breeze.
`Lothlurien! ' cried Legolas. 'Lothlurien! We have come to the eaves of
the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter! '
Under  the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the road
and stream that  ran suddenly  beneath their  spreading  boughs. In  the dim
light of  the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering leaves a hint
of fallow gold.
'Lothlurien! '  said  Aragorn. 'Glad I am to hear again the wind in the
trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can
go no further. Here  let  us hope that the virtue of the Elves will  keep us
tonight from the peril that comes behind.'
`If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,' said Gimli.
'It is long since any  of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land
whence we wandered in ages long ago,' said Legolas, 'but we hear that Lurien
is not yet deserted, for there is a  secret power here  that holds evil from
the land.  Nevertheless its folk are seldom  seen, and maybe they  dwell now
deep in the woods and far from the northern border.'
'Indeed deep  in the  wood they dwell,' said Aragorn, and sighed as  if
some memory stirred in him. `We must fend for ourselves tonight.  We will go
forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and then we will turn
aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.'
He stepped forward; but Boromir  stood irresolute and did  not  follow.
'Is there no other way? ' he said.
`What other fairer way would you desire? ' said Aragorn.
`A plain road, though it  led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir.
`By  strange  paths has this Company been  led, and so far  to evil fortune.
Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we
must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard
in  Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few
none have escaped unscathed.'
`Say not   unscathed    , but if you say   unchanged      , then maybe you will speak
the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of
those who once were wise they now speak evil of Lothlurien. Believe what you
will,  there  is no other  way  for  us --  unless  you  would  go  back  to
Moria-gate, or  scale the pathless mountains, or swim the  Great  River  all
alone.'
`Then lead on! ' said Boromir. `But it is perilous.'
`Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and perilous; but only evil need
fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me! '
They  had gone  little more than a mile into the  forest when they came
upon  another  stream flowing  down swiftly from  the tree-clad  slopes that
climbed back westward towards the mountains.  They heard it splashing over a
fall away among the shadows on  their  right. Its dark  hurrying waters  ran
across the path before  them, and joined  the Silverlode in a  swirl  of dim
pools among the roots of trees.
`Here is Nimrodel! ' said  Legolas.  'Of this stream  the Silvan  Elves
made  many songs long ago, and still we sing them  in the North, remembering
the rainbow on its falls, and the  golden flowers  that floated in its foam.
All is  dark now  and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my
feet, for it  is said that  the water is  healing to  the  weary.'  He  went
forward and climbed down the deep-cloven bank and stepped into the stream.
`Follow me!' he  cried. 'The water is not deep. Let us wade  across! On
the  further bank we can rest. and  the sound of the falling water may bring
us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.'
One by one they  climbed down and followed Legolas. For  a moment Frodo
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold
but its touch was clean, and  as he went on and it  mounted to his knees, he
felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.
When all  the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little
food; and Legolas  told them  tales of Lothlurien that the Elves of Mirkwood
still  kept  in their  hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by
