`A plain road, though it  led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir.
`By  strange  paths has this Company been  led, and so far  to evil fortune.
Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we
must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard
in  Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few
none have escaped unscathed.'
`Say not   unscathed    , but if you say   unchanged      , then maybe you will speak
the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of
those who once were wise they now speak evil of Lothlurien. Believe what you
will,  there  is no other  way  for  us --  unless  you  would  go  back  to
Moria-gate, or  scale the pathless mountains, or swim the  Great  River  all
alone.'
`Then lead on! ' said Boromir. `But it is perilous.'
`Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and perilous; but only evil need
fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me! '
They  had gone  little more than a mile into the  forest when they came
upon  another  stream flowing  down swiftly from  the tree-clad  slopes that
climbed back westward towards the mountains.  They heard it splashing over a
fall away among the shadows on  their  right. Its dark  hurrying waters  ran
across the path before  them, and joined  the Silverlode in a  swirl  of dim
pools among the roots of trees.
`Here is Nimrodel! ' said  Legolas.  'Of this stream  the Silvan  Elves
made  many songs long ago, and still we sing them  in the North, remembering
the rainbow on its falls, and the  golden flowers  that floated in its foam.
All is  dark now  and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my
feet, for it  is said that  the water is  healing to  the  weary.'  He  went
forward and climbed down the deep-cloven bank and stepped into the stream.
`Follow me!' he  cried. 'The water is not deep. Let us wade  across! On
the  further bank we can rest. and  the sound of the falling water may bring
us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.'
One by one they  climbed down and followed Legolas. For  a moment Frodo
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold
but its touch was clean, and  as he went on and it  mounted to his knees, he
felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.
When all  the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little
food; and Legolas  told them  tales of Lothlurien that the Elves of Mirkwood
still  kept  in their  hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by
the Great River before the world was grey.
At  length  a  silence fell, and they  heard the music of the waterfall
running sweetly  in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he  could  hear a
voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water.
`Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel? ' asked Legolas. 'I will sing you a
song  of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same  name  as the stream  beside
which she lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this
is how it runs in the  Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.' In
a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them  he
began:
An Elven-maid there was of old,
A shining star by day:
Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,
Her shoes of silver-grey.
A star was bound upon her brows,
A light was on her hair
As sun upon the golden boughs
In Lurien the fair.
Her hair was long, her limbs were white,
And fair she was and free;
And in the wind she went as light
As leaf of linden-tree.
Beside the falls of Nimrodel,
By water clear and cool,
Her voice as falling silver fell
Into the shining pool.
Where now she wanders none can tell,
In sunlight or in shade;
For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.
The elven-ship in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee
Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.
A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,
And drove the ship from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.
When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.
Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,
And cursed the faithless ship that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.
Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothlurien.
From helm to sea they saw him leap,
As arrow from the string,
And dive into the water deep,
As mew upon the wing.
The wind was in his flowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.
But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.
