Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.
A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,
And drove the ship from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.
When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.
Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,
And cursed the faithless ship that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.
Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothlurien.
From helm to sea they saw him leap,
As arrow from the string,
And dive into the water deep,
As mew upon the wing.
The wind was in his flowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.
But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.
The voice of Legolas faltered, and the  song ceased. 'I cannot sing any
more,' he said. 'That is  but a part, for I have forgotten much.  It is long
and  sad,  for  it  tells  how sorrow came  upon Lothlurien,  Lurien  of the
Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.'
`But the Dwarves did not make the evil,' said Gimli.
`I said not  so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly.  `Then many of
the Elves  of  Nimrodel's kindred left their dwellings and departed  and she
was  lost far in  the South, in  the passes of the White Mountains;  and she
came  not to  the ship where  Amroth her  lover waited for  her. But  in the
spring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be
heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is in the South the
voice  of Amroth comes up from the sea; for  Nimrodel flows into Silverlode,
that Elves call Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin  the Great. and  Anduin
flows into  the  Bay of Belfalas  whence the  Elves of Lurien set  sail. But
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth ever came back.
'It is told  that she had a house built in the branches  of a tree that
grew  near the falls; for that  was the custom  of the  Elves of  Lurien, to
dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were called the
Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep  in  their forest the trees are very great.
The people of the woods did not delve in the  ground like Dwarves, nor build
strong places of stone before the Shadow came.'
`And even in  these latter days dwelling in the trees might  be thought
safer than sitting on the  ground,' said  Gimli. He looked across the stream
to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then up into the roof of dark
boughs above.
`Your  words bring good counsel, Gimli,' said Aragorn. `We cannot build
a house, but  tonight we  will do as the Galadhrim  and seek  refuge  in the
tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside  the road  already longer than
was wise.'
The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into the shadow of
the deeper woods,  westward along  the mountain-stream away from
Silverlode.
Not  far from the falls of Nimrodel they  found a cluster of trees,  some of
which overhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mighty girth, but
their height could not be guessed.
`I will climb up,' said  Legolas. `I am at home among trees, by root or
bough, though  these  trees are of a kind strange to  me, save as  a name in
song.    Mellyrn     they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom,
but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is  their shape and way
of growth.'
`Whatever  it may be,'  said Pippin,  `they  will be  marvellous  trees
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot  sleep
on a perch! '
'Then dig a hole in the  ground,' said Legolas, `if that  is more after
the fashion of your kind. But  you  must dig swift and deep, if you  wish to
hide from Orcs.' He sprang  lightly up from the ground  and  caught a branch
that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for
a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him.
` Daro! '  it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to  earth
in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree.
'Stand still! ' he whispered to the others. `Do not move or speak! '
There  was a sound  of soft laughter over their heads, and then another
clear voice spoke in an  elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what
was  said, for the speech that the  Silvan folk east of the  mountains  used
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and
answered
in the same language.*
`Who are they, and what do they say? ' asked Merry.
`They're Elves,' said Sam. `Can't you hear their voices? '
`Yes, they are Elves,'  said Legolas; `and they say that you breathe so
loud that they could  shoot you in the dark.' Sam  hastily put his hand over
his mouth.  'But they say also that  you need have  no fear. They have  been
aware of us for a long while. They heard  my  voice across the Nimrodel, and
knew that I  was one of their  Northern kindred, and therefore they did  not
hinder our  crossing; and  afterwards  they  heard  my song. Now they bid me
climb up  with Frodo;  for they seem  to have had some tidings of him and of
our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep  watch at  the
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.'
Out of  the  shadows a  ladder  was  let  down:  it  was made  of rope,
silver-grey and  glimmering  in the dark, and  though it looked  slender  it
proved  strong enough to bear  many men. Legolas ran  lightly up, and  Frodo
followed slowly; behind  came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches
of the mallorn-tree grew  out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept
upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown  of many boughs,
