song.    Mellyrn     they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom,
but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is  their shape and way
of growth.'
`Whatever  it may be,'  said Pippin,  `they  will be  marvellous  trees
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot  sleep
on a perch! '
'Then dig a hole in the  ground,' said Legolas, `if that  is more after
the fashion of your kind. But  you  must dig swift and deep, if you  wish to
hide from Orcs.' He sprang  lightly up from the ground  and  caught a branch
that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for
a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him.
` Daro! '  it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to  earth
in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree.
'Stand still! ' he whispered to the others. `Do not move or speak! '
There  was a sound  of soft laughter over their heads, and then another
clear voice spoke in an  elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what
was  said, for the speech that the  Silvan folk east of the  mountains  used
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and
answered
in the same language.*
`Who are they, and what do they say? ' asked Merry.
`They're Elves,' said Sam. `Can't you hear their voices? '
`Yes, they are Elves,'  said Legolas; `and they say that you breathe so
loud that they could  shoot you in the dark.' Sam  hastily put his hand over
his mouth.  'But they say also that  you need have  no fear. They have  been
aware of us for a long while. They heard  my  voice across the Nimrodel, and
knew that I  was one of their  Northern kindred, and therefore they did  not
hinder our  crossing; and  afterwards  they  heard  my song. Now they bid me
climb up  with Frodo;  for they seem  to have had some tidings of him and of
our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep  watch at  the
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.'
Out of  the  shadows a  ladder  was  let  down:  it  was made  of rope,
silver-grey and  glimmering  in the dark, and  though it looked  slender  it
proved  strong enough to bear  many men. Legolas ran  lightly up, and  Frodo
followed slowly; behind  came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches
of the mallorn-tree grew  out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept
upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown  of many boughs,
and  among these they  found that there had been built a wooden platform, or
flet  as such things were called in those days: the  Elves called it a              talan  .
It  was  reached  by a round hole in  the  centre  through  which the ladder
passed.
When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated  with
three other Elves. They were clad  in  shadowy-grey, and could  not  be seen
among  the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of
them uncovered a small lamp that  gave out a slender silver beam. He held it
up,  looking at Frodo's face,  and Sam's. Then he shut  off the light again,
and  spoke words of welcome in  his elven-tongue.  Frodo  spoke haltingly in
return.
`Welcome!' the Elf then said  again in the  Common  Language,  speaking
slowly. 'We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart
of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings  with any other folk. Even
our own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there  are some of us
still  who  go  abroad  for  the gathering  of news and the watching  of our
enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my
name. My brothers, R®mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue.
`But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers of Elrond
passed by Lurien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of
hobbits, or halflings, for many a long year,  and did not know  that any yet
dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not  look evil! And since you come with an Elf
of our  kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as  Elrond asked; though it
is not our custom to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here
tonight. How many are you? '
`Eight,' said Legolas. `Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom,
Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.'
`The  name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lurien,' said Haldir,
`and  he  has the favour of  the  Lady. All then is  well.  But you have yet
spoken only of seven.'
`The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas.
`A dwarf! '  said Haldir. `That  is not well. We have not had  dealings
with  the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I
cannot allow him to pass.'
`But  he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of  Dbin's trusty people, and
friendly to Elrond,' said Frodo. `Elrond himself  chose him to be one of our
companions, and he has been brave and faithful.'
The  Elves  spoke together in  soft  voices, and questioned Legolas  in
their own tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. `We will do this, though
it is against our liking. If  Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer
for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlurien.
`But now  we must debate  no  longer. Your folk  must not remain on the
ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a  great
troop of Orcs  going north toward Moria, along  the skirts of the mountains,
many days ago. Wolves  are howling on the wood's borders. If you have indeed
come from Moria, the peril cannot  be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go
on.
'The four hobbits shall climb up here  and  stay with us-we do not fear
them! There is  another        talan  in  the next tree.  There the others must take
refuge.  You, Legolas, must answer to us for them. Call  us, if  anything is
amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!'
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon
afterwards Merry and Pippin  clambered up on to the high flet. They were out
of breath and seemed rather scared.
`There!' said Merry  panting. `We  have lugged up your blankets as well
as  our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of  the baggage in a deep drift
of leaves.'
`You had no  need  of your burdens,' said  Haldir. `It is  cold in  the
tree-tops in  winter, though the wind tonight is  in the  South; but we have
food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill, and we have
skins and cloaks to spare.'
The  hobbits accepted this  second (and far better) supper very gladly.
Then they  wrapped themselves warmly,  not only  in  the fur-cloaks  of  the
Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and  tried  to  go  to  sleep. But
weary  as  they  were only  Sam found that  easy to  do. Hobbits do not like
heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet
was not at  all to their liking as a  bedroom.  It had  no walls. not even a
rail; only on one side  was there a  light  plaited  screen,  which could be
moved and fixed in different places according to the wind.
Pippin went on  talking for a while. `I  hope, if I  do  go to sleep in
this bed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said.
`Once I do get to sleep,' said Sam, 'i  shall go on sleeping, whether I
roll off or no. And the less said,  the sooner I'll drop off, if you take my
meaning.'
