The  Elves  spoke together in  soft  voices, and questioned Legolas  in
their own tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. `We will do this, though
it is against our liking. If  Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer
for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlurien.
`But now  we must debate  no  longer. Your folk  must not remain on the
ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a  great
troop of Orcs  going north toward Moria, along  the skirts of the mountains,
many days ago. Wolves  are howling on the wood's borders. If you have indeed
come from Moria, the peril cannot  be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go
on.
'The four hobbits shall climb up here  and  stay with us-we do not fear
them! There is  another        talan  in  the next tree.  There the others must take
refuge.  You, Legolas, must answer to us for them. Call  us, if  anything is
amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!'
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon
afterwards Merry and Pippin  clambered up on to the high flet. They were out
of breath and seemed rather scared.
`There!' said Merry  panting. `We  have lugged up your blankets as well
as  our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of  the baggage in a deep drift
of leaves.'
`You had no  need  of your burdens,' said  Haldir. `It is  cold in  the
tree-tops in  winter, though the wind tonight is  in the  South; but we have
food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill, and we have
skins and cloaks to spare.'
The  hobbits accepted this  second (and far better) supper very gladly.
Then they  wrapped themselves warmly,  not only  in  the fur-cloaks  of  the
Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and  tried  to  go  to  sleep. But
weary  as  they  were only  Sam found that  easy to  do. Hobbits do not like
heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet
was not at  all to their liking as a  bedroom.  It had  no walls. not even a
rail; only on one side  was there a  light  plaited  screen,  which could be
moved and fixed in different places according to the wind.
Pippin went on  talking for a while. `I  hope, if I  do  go to sleep in
this bed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said.
`Once I do get to sleep,' said Sam, 'i  shall go on sleeping, whether I
roll off or no. And the less said,  the sooner I'll drop off, if you take my
meaning.'
Frodo  lay  for some  time awake,  and looked up  at the stars glinting
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his  side long
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see  the grey forms of two
elves  sitting motionless  with their  arms about  their  knees, speaking in
whispers. The other had  gone down to take up  his watch on one of the lower
branches. At  last lulled by the wind in the  boughs above,  and  the  sweet
murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below,  Frodo  fell  asleep with the song of
Legolas running in his mind.
Late in the  night he awoke. The  other hobbits were  asleep. The Elves
were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the leaves. The wind
was
still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on
the ground below. There was a ring of  metal. The sounds died  slowly  away,
and seemed to go southward, on into the wood.
A head  appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodo sat up in
alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits.
`What is it? ' said Frodo.
` Yrch! ' said  the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the flet the
rope-ladder rolled up.
'Orcs! ' said Frodo. `What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone.
There were  no more  sounds. Even the leaves were silent,  and the very
falls  seemed  to  be hushed.  Frodo sat and  shivered in his wraps. He  was
thankful that they had not been  caught on the ground; but he felt  that the
trees offered little  protection, except concealment.  Orcs were  as keen as
hounds on  a scent, it  was  said, but they could  also climb.  He drew  out
Sting: it flashed and glittered  like a  blue  flame  and then  slowly faded
again and grew dull. In  spite  of the  fading of his  sword  the feeling of
immediate danger did not leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and
crawled to the opening and peered  down. He was almost certain that he could
hear stealthy movements at the tree's foot far below.
Not Elves; for  the  woodland folk were  altogether noiseless in  their
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing: and something seemed
to  be  scrabbling on the bark of  the tree-trunk. He  stared down into  the
dark, holding his breath.
Something was now  climbing slowly, and  its breath  came  like a  soft
hissing through closed teeth. Then coming  up, close  to the stem, Frodo saw
two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they
turned
away, and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished.
Immediately  afterwards Haldir  came  climbing swiftly  up through  the
branches. `There was something in this tree that I have never seen  before,'
he said. `It was not an orc. It fled as  soon as I touched the tree-stem. It
seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees, or I  might have thought
that it was one of you hobbits.
'I did not  shoot, for I  dared not arouse any  cries:  we cannot  risk
battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the Nimrodel-curse
their foul feet in its clean water!-and went on down the old road beside the
river. They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground for a
while near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a
hundred,  so we went ahead and spoke  with feigned  voices, leading  them on
into the wood.
`Orophin  has  now  gone in haste  back  to our  dwellings  to warn our
people. None of the Orcs will  ever return out of  Lurien. And there will be
many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls. But you
must take the road south as soon as it is fully light.'
Day came pale from the East. As the light grew  it filtered through the
yellow leaves of  the mallorn, and  it  seemed to the hobbits that the early
sun of a  cool summer's morning was  shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the
moving branches. Looking  through an opening on the south side  of the  flet
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying  like a  sea of fallow gold
tossing gently in the breeze.
The  morning was  still  young and cold when the Company set out again,
guided now  by Haldir and his  brother  R®mil. `Farewell,  sweet Nimrodel! '
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and  caught a gleam of white foam among
the
grey tree-stems.  `Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him  that he would never
hear again  a running water so beautiful, for  ever blending its innumerable
notes in an endless changeful music.
They went back to the path that  still  went on along the west side  of
the  Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the
prints of orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees
and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.
`There is one of my  people yonder across the stream,' he said  `though
