two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they
turned
away, and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished.
Immediately  afterwards Haldir  came  climbing swiftly  up through  the
branches. `There was something in this tree that I have never seen  before,'
he said. `It was not an orc. It fled as  soon as I touched the tree-stem. It
seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees, or I  might have thought
that it was one of you hobbits.
'I did not  shoot, for I  dared not arouse any  cries:  we cannot  risk
battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the Nimrodel-curse
their foul feet in its clean water!-and went on down the old road beside the
river. They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground for a
while near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a
hundred,  so we went ahead and spoke  with feigned  voices, leading  them on
into the wood.
`Orophin  has  now  gone in haste  back  to our  dwellings  to warn our
people. None of the Orcs will  ever return out of  Lurien. And there will be
many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls. But you
must take the road south as soon as it is fully light.'
Day came pale from the East. As the light grew  it filtered through the
yellow leaves of  the mallorn, and  it  seemed to the hobbits that the early
sun of a  cool summer's morning was  shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the
moving branches. Looking  through an opening on the south side  of the  flet
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying  like a  sea of fallow gold
tossing gently in the breeze.
The  morning was  still  young and cold when the Company set out again,
guided now  by Haldir and his  brother  R®mil. `Farewell,  sweet Nimrodel! '
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and  caught a gleam of white foam among
the
grey tree-stems.  `Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him  that he would never
hear again  a running water so beautiful, for  ever blending its innumerable
notes in an endless changeful music.
They went back to the path that  still  went on along the west side  of
the  Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the
prints of orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees
and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.
`There is one of my  people yonder across the stream,' he said  `though
you may not see him.' He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out
of a thicket of  young trees an Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood
thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully
cast over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and bound the end
about a tree near the bank.
`Celebrant is  already  a  strong stream here, as you see,' said Haldir
'and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot in it
so far  north, unless  we must. But  in these days of watchfulness we do not
make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!' He  made his end of the rope
fast about another tree,  and then ran lightly along it, over the  river and
back again, as if he were on a road.
`I  can walk  this path,' said  Legolas; `but the others have not  this
skill. Must they swim?'
`No!' said Haldir. `We have two  more ropes. We  will fasten them above
the other, one shoulder-high,  and another half-high, and holding these  the
strangers should be able to cross with care.'
When this  slender bridge had been made, the Company passed  over, some
cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of  the hobbits Pippin proved the
best for he was  sure-footed, and he walked  over quickly, holding only with
one hand;  but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam
shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water
as if it was a chasm in the mountains.
He breathed with relief when he was safely across. `Live and  learn! as
my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening,  not of roosting
like a bird,  nor  of trying  to walk like a spider. Not even my  uncle Andy
ever did a trick like that! '
When  at length  all the Company was gathered on the  east  bank of the
Silverlode,  the Elves untied the ropes and  coiled two of them.  R®mil, who
had remained  on  the  other side, drew back the last  one, slung  it on his
shoulder, and  with a wave of his hand went away,  back to  Nimrodel to keep
watch.
`Now, friends,'  said  Haldir, `you have entered the Naith of Lurien or
the  Gore, as you would  say, for it is the land that lies like a spear-head
between the arms of Silverlode  and Anduin the Great. We  allow no strangers
to spy  out the secrets of the  Naith. Few indeed  are permitted even to set
foot there.
`As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf. The
other may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our dwellings, down
in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.'
This was not at  all to the liking of  Gimli.  `The  agreement was made
without my consent,' he said. `I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a
prisoner. And I am no spy.  My folk  have never had dealings with any of the
servants of the Enemy. Neither have we  done harm to the Elves. I am no more
likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.'
'I  do not doubt you,' said Haldir. 'Yet this is our law. I am  not the
master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I  have done much in letting you
set foot over Celebrant.'
Gimli was  obstinate. He  planted his feet  firmly apart, and laid  his
hand upon the haft of his axe. 'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will
go back and seek my own land,  where I am known to be true of word, though I
perish alone in the wilderness.'
`You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly. 'Now you have come thus far,
you must be  brought before the Lord and the Lady. They shall judge  you, to
hold  you or to  give you leave, as they  will. You cannot cross the  rivers
again, and behind you  there are now secret sentinels  that you cannot pass.
You would be slain before you saw them.'
Gimli  drew  his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent their
bows. 'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas.
'Come!'  said Aragorn. `If I am still to lead this Company, you must do
as I bid. It is hard upon  the Dwarf to be thus singled  out. We will all be
blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make  the journey
slow and dull.'
Gimli laughed  suddenly. `A  merry  troop of fools we  shall look! Will
Haldir lead us all on a string, like  many blind beggars with one dog? But I
will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.'
`I am an Elf and a  kinsman here,' said Legolas, becoming angry  in his
turn.
`Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn.
`But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes Haldir! '
`I shall claim  full amends for every fall and  stubbed  toe, if you do
not lead us well,' said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.
'You will have no claim,' said  Haldir. `I shall lead you well, and the
paths are smooth and straight.'
`Alas for  the  folly  of these  days! ' said Legolas.  'Here  all  are
