other may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our dwellings, down
in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.'
This was not at  all to the liking of  Gimli.  `The  agreement was made
without my consent,' he said. `I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a
prisoner. And I am no spy.  My folk  have never had dealings with any of the
servants of the Enemy. Neither have we  done harm to the Elves. I am no more
likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.'
'I  do not doubt you,' said Haldir. 'Yet this is our law. I am  not the
master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I  have done much in letting you
set foot over Celebrant.'
Gimli was  obstinate. He  planted his feet  firmly apart, and laid  his
hand upon the haft of his axe. 'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will
go back and seek my own land,  where I am known to be true of word, though I
perish alone in the wilderness.'
`You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly. 'Now you have come thus far,
you must be  brought before the Lord and the Lady. They shall judge  you, to
hold  you or to  give you leave, as they  will. You cannot cross the  rivers
again, and behind you  there are now secret sentinels  that you cannot pass.
You would be slain before you saw them.'
Gimli  drew  his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent their
bows. 'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas.
'Come!'  said Aragorn. `If I am still to lead this Company, you must do
as I bid. It is hard upon  the Dwarf to be thus singled  out. We will all be
blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make  the journey
slow and dull.'
Gimli laughed  suddenly. `A  merry  troop of fools we  shall look! Will
Haldir lead us all on a string, like  many blind beggars with one dog? But I
will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.'
`I am an Elf and a  kinsman here,' said Legolas, becoming angry  in his
turn.
`Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn.
`But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes Haldir! '
`I shall claim  full amends for every fall and  stubbed  toe, if you do
not lead us well,' said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.
'You will have no claim,' said  Haldir. `I shall lead you well, and the
paths are smooth and straight.'
`Alas for  the  folly  of these  days! ' said Legolas.  'Here  all  are
enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must  walk blind, while the sun is merry
in the woodland under leaves of gold! '
`Folly it  may seem,' said Haldir. 'Indeed  in nothing is the power  of
the Dark Lord more clearly shown  than in the estrangement that  divides all
those who still oppose him.  Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in
the world beyond Lothlurien, unless maybe in  Rivendell, that we dare not by
our own  trust  endanger our  land. We live  now  upon  an island  amid many
perils, and our hands are more often upon the bowstring than upon the harp.
`The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the
Shadow has crept northward  all about  us. Some speak of departing, yet  for
that it already seems too  late. The mountains to the west are growing evil;
to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron's creatures; and  it  is
rumoured  that we cannot  now safely pass southward  through  Rohan, and the
mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come
to
the shores of the Sea, we  should  find no  longer any shelter there. It  is
said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are  far north
and west, beyond the land of  the Halflings.  But where  that may be, though
the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.'
`You ought  at  least to guess,  since you have seen  us,' said  Merry.
`There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.'
`Happy folk  are  Hobbits to dwell  near  the shores of the sea! ' said
Haldir. 'It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet still
we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.'
`I cannot,' said Merry. `I have never seen them.  I have never been out
of my own land before. And if I had known what the world outside was like. I
don't think I should have had the heart to leave it.'
`Not even to see fair Lothlurien? '  said Haldir.  'The world is indeed
full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is much
that is fair, and  though in all lands love is  now  mingled with  grief, it
grows perhaps the greater.
`Some there are among us  who sing that  the Shadow  will draw back and
peace shall come again.  Yet I do not believe  that  the world about us will
ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun as it was aforetime.
For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass
to  the  Sea  unhindered  and  leave the Middle-earth  for  ever.  Alas  for
Lothlurien that I  love! It would be a  poor life in a land where no mallorn
grew.  But  if  there  are  mallorn-trees beyond  the Great Sea,  none  have
reported it.'
As they spoke  thus, the  Company filed slowly along the  paths  in the
wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground
beneath their  feet smooth and  soft, and  after  a while they  walked  more
freely, without fear of hurt or  fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo  found
his hearing and  other senses  sharpened. He could smell the  trees and  the
trodden  grass.  He could hear many  different notes in  the  rustle  of the
leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on  his right, and  the thin clear
voices of birds in  the sky. He  felt the sun upon his face  and hands  when
they passed through an open glade.
As  soon  as he  set  foot  upon the  far  bank of Silverlode a strange
feeling had come upon  him, and it  deepened as he walked on into the Naith:
it seemed to him that  he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of
the  Elder Days, and  was -now walking  in  a world that  was  no  more.  In
Rivendell  there was memory of  ancient things; in Lurien the ancient things
still lived on  in the waking world. Evil had been  seen  and  heard  there,
sorrow had been known; the Elves  feared and  distrusted the world  outside:
wolves  were howling on  the wood's borders: but  on  the land  of Lurien no
shadow lay.
All that day the  Company marched on, until  they felt the cool evening
come and heard  the early night-wind whispering among many leaves. Then
they
rested and slept without fear upon the ground;  for  their guides would  not
permit  them to unbind their eyes, and they could  not climb. In the morning
they went  on again,  walking without  haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo
was aware that they had  passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard
the sound of many voices all around him.
A marching host of Elves  had  come up silently:  they  were  hastening
toward the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they
brought news,  some of  which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs  had  been
waylaid and  almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the
mountains, and were being pursued.  A strange creature also  had  been seen,
running with bent back and  with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet
not of beast-shape. It  had eluded  capture, and  they had not  shot it, not
knowing whether it was good or ill, and  it had vanished down the Silverlode
southward.
