grew.  But  if  there  are  mallorn-trees beyond  the Great Sea,  none  have
reported it.'
As they spoke  thus, the  Company filed slowly along the  paths  in the
wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground
beneath their  feet smooth and  soft, and  after  a while they  walked  more
freely, without fear of hurt or  fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo  found
his hearing and  other senses  sharpened. He could smell the  trees and  the
trodden  grass.  He could hear many  different notes in  the  rustle  of the
leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on  his right, and  the thin clear
voices of birds in  the sky. He  felt the sun upon his face  and hands  when
they passed through an open glade.
As  soon  as he  set  foot  upon the  far  bank of Silverlode a strange
feeling had come upon  him, and it  deepened as he walked on into the Naith:
it seemed to him that  he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of
the  Elder Days, and  was -now walking  in  a world that  was  no  more.  In
Rivendell  there was memory of  ancient things; in Lurien the ancient things
still lived on  in the waking world. Evil had been  seen  and  heard  there,
sorrow had been known; the Elves  feared and  distrusted the world  outside:
wolves  were howling on  the wood's borders: but  on  the land  of Lurien no
shadow lay.
All that day the  Company marched on, until  they felt the cool evening
come and heard  the early night-wind whispering among many leaves. Then
they
rested and slept without fear upon the ground;  for  their guides would  not
permit  them to unbind their eyes, and they could  not climb. In the morning
they went  on again,  walking without  haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo
was aware that they had  passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard
the sound of many voices all around him.
A marching host of Elves  had  come up silently:  they  were  hastening
toward the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they
brought news,  some of  which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs  had  been
waylaid and  almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the
mountains, and were being pursued.  A strange creature also  had  been seen,
running with bent back and  with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet
not of beast-shape. It  had eluded  capture, and  they had not  shot it, not
knowing whether it was good or ill, and  it had vanished down the Silverlode
southward.
`Also,' said Haldir, `they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of
the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf Gimli. It seems that
the  Lady knows who and what is each member of  your  Company.  New
messages
have come from Rivendell perhaps.'
He  removed the  bandage  first from Gimli's eyes.  'Your pardon! '  he
said, bowing low. `Look on  us now with friendly eyes! Look and be glad, for
you are the  first  dwarf to behold the  trees of the Naith of  Lurien since
Durin's Day! '
When  his eyes were in  turn uncovered, Frodo looked up  and caught his
breath.  They were  standing  in an  open  space. To the  left stood a great
mound, covered with  a sward of grass as  green as Spring-time in the  Elder
Days.  Upon it, as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the  outer had
bark  of  snowy white,  and  were leafless  but  beautiful in  their shapely
nakedness;  the inner were mallorn-trees of great height,  still arrayed  in
pale  gold. High  amid  the branches of a  towering  tree that stood in  the
centre of all there gleamed a white flet. At the feet of  the trees, and all
about  the  green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden  flowers
shaped  like  stars.  Among them,  nodding  on  slender  stalks, were  other
flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered  as a mist amid the rich hue
of  the  grass. Over all the sky was blue, and  the sun  of afternoon glowed
upon the hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.
'Behold! You  are come to Cerin Amroth,' said Haldir. `For this is  the
heart  of the ancient realm  as it  was long ago, and here is the  mound  of
Amroth, where in  happier days his high house was built. Here ever bloom the
winter  flowers  in the  unfading grass:  the  yellow              elanor  , and the  pale
niphredil   . Here we will stay awhile, and  come  to the city of the Galadhrim
at dusk.'
The  others  cast themselves down  upon the  fragrant grass,  but Frodo
stood  awhile still lost in wonder.  It seemed  to him that  he  had stepped
through a high window  that looked on a vanished world. A light was  upon it
for which his language  had no  name.  All that  he saw was shapely, but the
shapes  seemed at once clear cut, as  if they had  been first conceived  and
drawn at the uncovering of  his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for
ever. He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green,
but  they were  fresh  and poignant,  as if  he  had  at  that  moment first
perceived them and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter  here
no
heart  could  mourn for summer  or  for spring.  No  blemish  or sickness or
deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On the land of
Lurien there was no stain.
He  turned  and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking round
with a  puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as  if he was not sure that
he was  awake. `It's  sunlight  and bright  day, right enough,'  he said. `I
thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was          inside  a song. if you take
my meaning.'
Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of both
thought  and  word.  He  smiled. `You  feel the  power of  the  Lady of  the
Galadhrim,' he said. `Would it please you  to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?
'
They followed  him  as  he stepped lightly up  the  grass-clad  slopes.
Though he walked and  breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were
stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that  he was in
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When
he had gone and passed again into  the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer
from the Shire would walk there, upon the  grass among                    elanor   and  niphredil
in fair Lothlurien.
They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the  South  Wind
blew  upon Cerin Amroth and  sighed among the  branches. Frodo  stood still,
hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away,
and sea-birds crying whose race had perished from the earth.
Haldir  had gone on and was  now  climbing to the high  flet. As  Frodo
prepared to follow him,  he laid his hand  upon the  tree beside the ladder:
never before had  he been  so  suddenly and so keenly aware of the  feel and
texture of a tree's skin and of the life within  it. He  felt  a  delight in
wood and  the touch of it, neither  as forester nor as carpenter; it was the
delight of the living tree itself.
As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his hand
and turned him toward the South. `Look this way first! ' he said.
Frodo looked  and saw, still at some  distance, a  hill of many  mighty
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it,
it seemed  to him that the  power and light came that held all the  land  in
