perceived them and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter  here
no
heart  could  mourn for summer  or  for spring.  No  blemish  or sickness or
deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On the land of
Lurien there was no stain.
He  turned  and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking round
with a  puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as  if he was not sure that
he was  awake. `It's  sunlight  and bright  day, right enough,'  he said. `I
thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was          inside  a song. if you take
my meaning.'
Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of both
thought  and  word.  He  smiled. `You  feel the  power of  the  Lady of  the
Galadhrim,' he said. `Would it please you  to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?
'
They followed  him  as  he stepped lightly up  the  grass-clad  slopes.
Though he walked and  breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were
stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that  he was in
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When
he had gone and passed again into  the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer
from the Shire would walk there, upon the  grass among                    elanor   and  niphredil
in fair Lothlurien.
They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the  South  Wind
blew  upon Cerin Amroth and  sighed among the  branches. Frodo  stood still,
hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away,
and sea-birds crying whose race had perished from the earth.
Haldir  had gone on and was  now  climbing to the high  flet. As  Frodo
prepared to follow him,  he laid his hand  upon the  tree beside the ladder:
never before had  he been  so  suddenly and so keenly aware of the  feel and
texture of a tree's skin and of the life within  it. He  felt  a  delight in
wood and  the touch of it, neither  as forester nor as carpenter; it was the
delight of the living tree itself.
As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his hand
and turned him toward the South. `Look this way first! ' he said.
Frodo looked  and saw, still at some  distance, a  hill of many  mighty
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it,
it seemed  to him that the  power and light came that held all the  land  in
sway. He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the  green city. Then
he looked  eastward and  saw all the land of Lurien running down to the pale
gleam of Anduin, the Great  River.  He lifted his  eyes across the river and
all the light went out, and he  was back again in the world he knew.  Beyond
the river  the land  appeared flat and empty,  formless and vague, until far
away  it  rose  again  like  a  wall, dark  and drear.  The sun that lay  on
Lothlurien had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height.
`There  lies  the fastness of  Southern  Mirkwood,' said Haldir. `It is
clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and
their branches rot and wither. In the midst upon a  stony height  stands Dol
Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is
inhabited again,  and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it
of  late. In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one
to another;  and ever  they  strive now  in thought,  but whereas the  light
perceives  the very  heart of  the darkness,  its  own  secret has not  been
discovered. Not yet.' He turned and climbed swiftly down, and  they followed
him.
At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still  and silent as a
tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in
his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked  at him he
knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For the
grim years were removed from the  face of Aragorn, and he  seemed clothed in
white, a  young lord  tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue
to one whom Frodo could not see            . Arwen vanimelda, nambril!           he said, and then
he drew a breath, and returning  out  of his thought  he looked at Frodo and
smiled.
`Here  is the  heart of Elvendom on earth,' he said, `and here my heart
dwells  ever,  unless there  be a light beyond the dark roads that  we still
must tread, you and I. Come with  me!  ' And taking Frodo's hand in  his, he
left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man.
Chapter 7. The Mirror of Galadriel
The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  mountains,  and the  shadows  were
deepening in the woods, when  they went on again.  Their paths now went into
thickets  where  the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees
as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under a
pale evening sky pricked by a  few early  stars.  There  was a wide treeless
space  before  them, running in a  great circle  and bending away on  either
hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its
brink was green, as if it  glowed still in memory of the sun that  had gone.
Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen  in
all the land. Their height  could not be  guessed,  but they stood up in the
twilight like living towers. In  their, many-tiered branches and amid  their
ever-moving  leaves  countless  lights were  gleaming,  green and  gold  and
silver. Haldir turned towards the Company.
`Welcome to  Caras  Galadhon!  ' he  said. 'Here  is the  city  of  the
Galadhrim where dwell  the Lord Celeborn  and Galadriel  the Lady of Lurien.
But we  cannot enter here,  for  the gates do not look northward. We must go
round to the  southern side,  and the  way is  not  short,  for the city  is
great.'
There was a road  paved with white stone  running on the outer brink of
the  fosse. Along this  they went westward, with the city  ever  climbing up
like  a  green cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened  more lights
sprang forth, until all the  hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last
to  a white  bridge, and crossing found  the  great gates of the  city: they
faced south-west, set between the  ends of the  encircling  wall  that  here
overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.
Haldir knocked  and  spoke,  and the gates  opened soundlessly; but  of
guards Frodo could see no sign. The  travellers passed within, and the gates
shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and
passing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could
they  see, nor  hear  any feet upon the paths;  but  there were many voices,
about them, and  in the air  above. Far away up  on the hill they could hear
