history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and
gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain.
One day, perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in
full by one who knows it best.
'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how  this thing
came to  you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that  I will say. It
was Gil-galad,  Elven-king and Elendil  of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron,
though they themselves perished in the  deed; and Isildur Elendil's son  cut
the  Ring  from  Sauron's hand and  took  it  for his own.  Then  Sauron was
vanquished  and  his  spirit fled and was hidden for long  years,  until his
shadow took shape again in Mirkwood.
'But  the  Ring was lost. It fell  into  the Great  River, Anduin,  and
vanished. For Isildur was marching north  along the east banks of the River,
and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, and
almost all his folk  were slain. He leaped  into the waters,  but  the  Ring
slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and killed him
with arrows.'
Gandalf paused. 'And there in the dark pools amid the  Gladden Fields,'
he said, 'the Ring passed out  of knowledge and legend; and even so much  of
its history is known now  only to a few, and the Council of the  Wise  could
discover no more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think.
'Long  after, but  still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the
Great River  on  the edge of  Wilderland  a  clever-handed  and quiet-footed
little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the fathers of  the
fathers  of the Stoors, for they loved  the  River, and often swam in it, or
made  little  boats  of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute,
for it was  large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother
of  the  folk, stern  and  wise  in old lore,  such  as they  had. The  most
inquisitive and  curious-minded of that  family was called  Smjagol. He  was
interested in  roots and beginnings; he dived into  deep pools; he  burrowed
under  trees and  growing plants; he tunnelled  into green  mounds;  and  he
ceased to  look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or  the flowers
opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward.
'He had a  friend  called Djagol, of similar sort, sharper-eyed but not
so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the Gladden
Fields, where  there were  great beds  of  iris  and  flowering reeds. There
Smjagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Deal sat in the boat and
fished. Suddenly a great fish took  his  hook, and before he  knew where  he
was, he was dragged out and down into the water, to  the bottom. Then he let
go of his line, for he thought he saw  something shining  in  the river-bed;
and holding his breath he grabbed at it.
'Then up he came spluttering,  with weeds in his  hair and a handful of
mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the mud away,
there
in his  hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it  shone and glittered in the
sun, so  that his heart  was glad.  But  Smjagol had  been watching him from
behind  a tree, and as Deal  gloated  over the  ring, Smjagol came softly up
behind.
'"Give  us  that,  Deal,  my  love,"  said Smjagol,  over  his friend's
shoulder.
'"Why?" said Deal.
' "Because it's my birthday, my love, and I wants it," said Smjagol.
'"I don't care," said Deal. "I have  given  you a present already, more
than I could afford. I found this, and I'm going to keep it."
' "Oh, are you  indeed, my  love," said  Smjagol; and he caught Deal by
the  throat  and  strangled  him,  because  the gold  looked  so bright  and
beautiful. Then he put the ring on his finger.
'No one  ever found out what had become  of  Deal;  he was murdered far
from home, and  his body  was cunningly hidden. But  Smjagol returned alone;
and he found that none of his  family could see him, when he was wearing the
ring. He was  very  pleased with  his discovery  and he concealed it; and he
used it  to  find  out secrets, and  he  put  his  knowledge to crooked  and
malicious  uses.  He became  sharp-eyed and  keen-eared  for  all  that  was
hurtful. The ring had given him power according to his stature. It is not to
be wondered at  that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when
visible)
by  all his  relations.  They kicked him, and he  bit their feet. He took to
thieving, and going about muttering to himself,  and gurgling in his throat.
So they called him       Gollum,    and cursed him, and told him to go far  away; and
his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and turned him
out of her hole.
'He wandered in  loneliness, weeping a little for the  hardness  of the
world, and he journeyed up the River, till  he came to a stream that  flowed
down from the mountains, and he went that way.  He caught fish in deep pools
with invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as  he
was  bending over a  pool, he felt a burning  on the back of his head) and a
dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for he
had almost forgotten about  the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and
shook his fist at her.
'But  as  he  lowered his eyes, he saw far above  the tops of the Misty
Mountains, out of which the stream came.  And he thought suddenly: "It would
be cool and shady under  those mountains. The Sun could not  watch me there.
The  roots  of those mountains  must be  roots indeed; there  must be  great
secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning."
'So he journeyed by night up into  the highlands, and he found a little
cave  out of which the dark stream ran; and  he wormed his way like a maggot
into the heart of the  hills, and vanished  out  of all  knowledge. The Ring
went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had
begun
to grow again, could learn nothing of it.'
'Gollum!' cried  Frodo. 'Gollum? Do  you mean  that this  is  the  very
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!'
'I  think  it  is  a sad  story,' said the  wizard, 'and it might  have
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.'
'I  can't  believe  that  Gollum  was  connected with  hobbits, however
distantly,' said Frodo with some heat. 'What an abominable notion!'
'It is  true all  the same,' replied Gandalf. 'About their  origins, at
any  rate, I know  more than hobbits  do themselves. And even  Bilbo's story
suggests the kinship. There  was  a  great  deal in the background  of their
minds  and memories  that was  very  similar.  They  understood one  another
remarkably well,  very much  better  than a hobbit would  understand, say, a
Dwarf, or an Orc, or even  an Elf. Think of the riddles they both  knew, for
one thing.'
'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and
of  much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat.  Gollum  meant to cheat all
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo  off his guard. And I daresay
it amused his wickedness  to  start a game which might end  in providing him
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.'
'Only too true, I fear,' said Gandalf. 'But there was something else in
it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly  ruined. He
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed -as a hobbit
