Chapter 7. The Mirror of Galadriel
The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  mountains,  and the  shadows  were
deepening in the woods, when  they went on again.  Their paths now went into
thickets  where  the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees
as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under a
pale evening sky pricked by a  few early  stars.  There  was a wide treeless
space  before  them, running in a  great circle  and bending away on  either
hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its
brink was green, as if it  glowed still in memory of the sun that  had gone.
Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen  in
all the land. Their height  could not be  guessed,  but they stood up in the
twilight like living towers. In  their, many-tiered branches and amid  their
ever-moving  leaves  countless  lights were  gleaming,  green and  gold  and
silver. Haldir turned towards the Company.
`Welcome to  Caras  Galadhon!  ' he  said. 'Here  is the  city  of  the
Galadhrim where dwell  the Lord Celeborn  and Galadriel  the Lady of Lurien.
But we  cannot enter here,  for  the gates do not look northward. We must go
round to the  southern side,  and the  way is  not  short,  for the city  is
great.'
There was a road  paved with white stone  running on the outer brink of
the  fosse. Along this  they went westward, with the city  ever  climbing up
like  a  green cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened  more lights
sprang forth, until all the  hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last
to  a white  bridge, and crossing found  the  great gates of the  city: they
faced south-west, set between the  ends of the  encircling  wall  that  here
overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.
Haldir knocked  and  spoke,  and the gates  opened soundlessly; but  of
guards Frodo could see no sign. The  travellers passed within, and the gates
shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and
passing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could
they  see, nor  hear  any feet upon the paths;  but  there were many voices,
about them, and  in the air  above. Far away up  on the hill they could hear
the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves.
They went along many paths and climbed many  stairs, until they came to
the high places and saw before them amid a wide  lawn a fountain shimmering.
It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees,  and it fell
into a  basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled.  Upon the  south
side of the lawn  there stood the mightiest  of  all  the trees;  its  great
smooth  bole  gleamed  like  grey  silk, and up it  towered, until its first
branches, far above, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves.
Beside it  a  broad white ladder stood, and  at  its foot three  Elves  were
seated. They sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they
were tall and  clad in grey  mail, and from their shoulders hung long  white
cloaks.
'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,'  said Haldir.  `It is  their  wish
that you should ascend and speak with them.'
One of the  Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and  it
was answered  three times from far  above. `I will  go first,' said  Haldir.
'Let Frodo come  next and  with him  Legolas. The others may follow  as they
wish. It is a  long climb for those that are not  accustomed to such stairs,
but you may rest upon the way.'
As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some
on  another,  and some set about  the  bole of the tree,  so that the ladder
passed through them. At a  great height above the ground he came to  a  wide
talan  , like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that
almost  it would have served  for  a hall of Men upon the earth. He  entered
behind  Haldir, and found that he was  in a chamber of oval  shape,  in  the
midst of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its
crown, and yet making still a pillar of wide girth.
The chamber was  filled with a  soft  light; its walls were  green  and
silver and  its roof  of gold. Many Elves were  seated there.  On two chairs
beneath the  bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough there sat, side
by side, Celeborn and Galadriel.  They stood up to greet their guests, after
the  manner  of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty kings. Very tall
they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave  and
beautiful.  They were clad wholly  in white; and the hair of the Lady was of
deep gold, and the hair of the  Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright;
but no sign  of  age was upon  them, unless it were  in  the depths of their
eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet  profound, the
wells of deep memory.
Haldir led  Frodo  before them, and the  Lord welcomed  him in his  own
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face.
`Sit  now beside  my chair, Frodo of the Shire!  ' said Celeborn. `When
all have come we will speak together.'
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name  as they entered.
`Welcome Aragorn son  of Arathorn! ' he said. `It is eight  and thirty years
of the world outside since you came to this land;  and those years lie heavy
on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for
a while! '
'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from
the North.'
`Welcome Gimli  son of  Gluin!  It is long indeed since  we  saw one of
Durin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our  long  law. May
it be a sign that though  the world is now dark better days are at hand, and
that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low.
When all  the guests were seated before his chair  the  Lord  looked at
them again. 'Here there  are eight,' he said. `Nine were to set out: so said
the messages. But maybe  there has been some  change of counsel that we have
not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this
year the shadows have grown longer.'
`Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speaking
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's
wont. `Gandalf the Grey  set out  with the Company, but he did  not pass the
borders of this land.  Now tell us where he is; for  I much desired to speak
with him again. But  I cannot see him from afar,  unless he comes within the
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and
of his mind are hidden from me.'
'Alas! ' said Aragorn. `Gandalf the Grey fell into  shadow. He remained
in Moria and did not escape.'
At these words  all the  Elves in the  hall  cried aloud  in grief  and
amazement. `These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, `the most evil that have
been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir.
`Why  has nothing  of  this  been  told  to me before?  '  he  asked in  the
Elven-tongue.
'We  have  not spoken  to  Haldir of  our  deeds or our purpose,'  said
Legolas. `At  first  we were  weary and  danger  was  too close  behind  and
