wells of deep memory.
Haldir led  Frodo  before them, and the  Lord welcomed  him in his  own
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face.
`Sit  now beside  my chair, Frodo of the Shire!  ' said Celeborn. `When
all have come we will speak together.'
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name  as they entered.
`Welcome Aragorn son  of Arathorn! ' he said. `It is eight  and thirty years
of the world outside since you came to this land;  and those years lie heavy
on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for
a while! '
'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from
the North.'
`Welcome Gimli  son of  Gluin!  It is long indeed since  we  saw one of
Durin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our  long  law. May
it be a sign that though  the world is now dark better days are at hand, and
that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low.
When all  the guests were seated before his chair  the  Lord  looked at
them again. 'Here there  are eight,' he said. `Nine were to set out: so said
the messages. But maybe  there has been some  change of counsel that we have
not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this
year the shadows have grown longer.'
`Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speaking
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's
wont. `Gandalf the Grey  set out  with the Company, but he did  not pass the
borders of this land.  Now tell us where he is; for  I much desired to speak
with him again. But  I cannot see him from afar,  unless he comes within the
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and
of his mind are hidden from me.'
'Alas! ' said Aragorn. `Gandalf the Grey fell into  shadow. He remained
in Moria and did not escape.'
At these words  all the  Elves in the  hall  cried aloud  in grief  and
amazement. `These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, `the most evil that have
been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir.
`Why  has nothing  of  this  been  told  to me before?  '  he  asked in  the
Elven-tongue.
'We  have  not spoken  to  Haldir of  our  deeds or our purpose,'  said
Legolas. `At  first  we were  weary and  danger  was  too close  behind  and
afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time,  as  we walked in gladness
on the fair paths of Lurien.'
`Yet our grief  is  great  and our loss  cannot be mended,' said Frodo.
'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us  through  Moria; and when  our  escape
seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.'
'Tell us now the full tale! ' said Celeborn:
Then  Aragorn  recounted  all  that  had  happened  upon  the  pass  of
Caradhras, and in  the  days that followed;  and  he spoke  of Balin and his
book, and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow
bridge, and  the  coming of the Terror.  'An  evil  of  the Ancient World it
seemed,  such as  I have  never seen before,' said  Aragorn. `It  was both a
shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.'
'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; `of  all elf-banes the most
deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.'
`Indeed I saw  upon  the bridge that  which haunts our darkest dreams l
saw Durin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes.
'Alas!  ' said Celeborn.  `We long have feared that  under Caradhras  a
terror slept.  But had  I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this evil in
Moria again,  l  would have forbidden you to pass the  northern borders, you
and all that went with you. And  if it were possible, one would  say that at
the last  Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net
of Moria.'
`He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely.
`Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him
knew not  his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be
with the  guide, the followers are blameless.  Do not repent of your welcome
to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long  and far from Lothlurien, who
of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not
wish
to look upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?
'Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zvram, and cold  are the  springs  of
Kibil-nvla,  and  fair were  the many-pillared halls  of Khazad-dym in Elder
Days before  the fall of mighty  kings beneath  the stone.' She looked  upon
Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the
names given in his own ancient tongue,  looked up and met her  eyes;  and it
seemed  to him that he looked  suddenly  into the heart of  an enemy and saw
there love and understanding. Wonder came into his face, and then  he smiled
in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed  in dwarf-fashion, saying: `Yet more fair is
the living land of  Lurien, and the Lady Galadriel is above  all the  jewels
that lie beneath the earth! '
There was  a silence.  At length Celeborn spoke again. `I did  not know
that your plight was so evil,' he said. `Let Gimli  forget my harsh words: I
spoke in  the trouble of  my heart. I will do what I  can  to aid you,  each
according  to his wish and need, but especially  that one of the little folk
who bears the burden.'
'Your quest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. `But  we
will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe,
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.
For  the  Lord of  the  Galadhrim is  accounted the wisest of  the Elves  of
Middle-earth, and a giver of  gifts beyond  the power of kings. He has dwelt
in  the  West  since  the days of  dawn, and  I have dwelt  with  him  years
uncounted;  for  ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin  I  passed over the
mountains, and together through ages  of  the world we have fought  the long
defeat.
'I it was who first summoned  the White Council. And  if my designs had
not  gone amiss, it would  have been  governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then
mayhap things would have  gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I
will not give you  counsel, saying do this,  or do that. For not in doing or
contriving, nor  in  choosing between this course and another, can  I avail;
but  only in knowing what was  and is, and in part also  what shall  be. But
this I will  say to you: your Quest  stands upon the edge of a knife.  Stray
but a little and it will fail, to the ruin  of  all. Yet hope remains  while
all the Company is true.'
And  with that word  she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked
searchingly at  each  of them  in turn. None save  Legolas and Aragorn could
long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head.
At  length  the  Lady Galadriel  released them from her  eyes,  and she
smiled. `Do not let your hearts be troubled,' she said. 'Tonight  you  shall
sleep in peace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have
been questioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken openly.
`Go now! ' said Celeborn. `You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even
if  your Quest did  not concern us  closely, you should  have refuge in this
City, until you were  healed and refreshed. Now  you shall rest, and we will
