in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed  in dwarf-fashion, saying: `Yet more fair is
the living land of  Lurien, and the Lady Galadriel is above  all the  jewels
that lie beneath the earth! '
There was  a silence.  At length Celeborn spoke again. `I did  not know
that your plight was so evil,' he said. `Let Gimli  forget my harsh words: I
spoke in  the trouble of  my heart. I will do what I  can  to aid you,  each
according  to his wish and need, but especially  that one of the little folk
who bears the burden.'
'Your quest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. `But  we
will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe,
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.
For  the  Lord of  the  Galadhrim is  accounted the wisest of  the Elves  of
Middle-earth, and a giver of  gifts beyond  the power of kings. He has dwelt
in  the  West  since  the days of  dawn, and  I have dwelt  with  him  years
uncounted;  for  ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin  I  passed over the
mountains, and together through ages  of  the world we have fought  the long
defeat.
'I it was who first summoned  the White Council. And  if my designs had
not  gone amiss, it would  have been  governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then
mayhap things would have  gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I
will not give you  counsel, saying do this,  or do that. For not in doing or
contriving, nor  in  choosing between this course and another, can  I avail;
but  only in knowing what was  and is, and in part also  what shall  be. But
this I will  say to you: your Quest  stands upon the edge of a knife.  Stray
but a little and it will fail, to the ruin  of  all. Yet hope remains  while
all the Company is true.'
And  with that word  she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked
searchingly at  each  of them  in turn. None save  Legolas and Aragorn could
long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head.
At  length  the  Lady Galadriel  released them from her  eyes,  and she
smiled. `Do not let your hearts be troubled,' she said. 'Tonight  you  shall
sleep in peace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have
been questioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken openly.
`Go now! ' said Celeborn. `You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even
if  your Quest did  not concern us  closely, you should  have refuge in this
City, until you were  healed and refreshed. Now  you shall rest, and we will
not speak of your further road for a while.'
That night the Company slept upon the ground, much  to the satisfaction
of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion  among  the trees  near
the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches; then speaking words of peace
with fair  elvish voices they left  them.  For a little while the travellers
talked of their night  before in the tree-tops, and of  their day's journey,
and of the Lord and  Lady;  for they had not yet the  heart to  look further
back.
`What  did you  blush for, Sam?  ' said  Pippin. `You soon  broke down.
Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing
worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.'
`I never thought no such thing,' answered Sam, in no mood for jest. 'If
you  want to know, I felt as if I hadn't  got nothing on,  and I didn't like
it. She seemed to be looking inside  me and asking me what I would do if she
gave me the chance of  flying back home to the Shire to a nice  little  hole
with-with a bit of garden of my own.'
`That's funny,' said Merry. 'Almost  exactly what I felt  myself; only,
only well, I don't think I'II say any more,' he ended lamely.
All  of them, it seemed, had fared  alike:  each  had felt that  he was
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and something
that he greatly  desired: clear before his mind it lay, and to get it he had
only to  turn  aside from the road and  leave the Quest and  the war against
Sauron to others.
`And it seemed  to me, too,'  said Gimli, `that my choice  would remain
secret and known only to myself.'
'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,' said Boromir. `Maybe it was only
a test,  and she thought to read our thoughts  for her own good purpose; but
almost I  should  have said that she was tempting us, and offering  what she
pretended to have the power to give. It  need not be  said that I refused to
listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.' But what he thought
that the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell.
And as for Frodo, he would  not speak, though  Boromir pressed him with
questions. `She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,' he said.
`Yes,'  said Frodo; `but whatever  came into my  mind  then I will keep
there.'
`Well, have a care!  ' said  Boromir.  `I do not feel too sure  of this
Elvish Lady and her purposes.'
`Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You know
not what you say.  There is in her  and in  this land no evil, unless a  man
bring  it  hither himself.  Then let him beware!  But  tonight I shall sleep
without  fear  for the first time  since  I left Rivendell. And may  I sleep
deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in  heart.' He
cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once into a long sleep.
The others soon did the same, and no sound  or  dream  disturbed  their
slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day  was broad upon the
lawn before the pavilion.  and  the fountain rose and fell glittering in the
sun.
They remained some  days in Lothlurien, so  far as they could  tell  or
remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun  shone clear, save for
a gentle  rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all  things fresh
and clean. The air was cool and  soft, as if it were  early spring, yet they
felt about them the deep  and thoughtful quiet of winter.  It seemed to them
that they did little but  eat and drink and  rest, and walk among the trees;
and it was enough.
They had not seen  the Lord and Lady  again, and they had little speech
with the Elven-folk; for few of these  knew or would use the Westron tongue.
Haldir  had  bidden them  farewell and gone back again to the  fences of the
North, where great watch was  now kept since the tidings of Moria  that  the
Company had  brought. Legolas  was away much among the Galadhrim,  and
after
the  first  night  he  did not sleep with  the  other companions,  though he
returned  to  eat and talk with them. Often he  took Gimli with him  when he
went abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and
all  that  each had  known and seen of him came clear before their minds. As
they  were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew
more keen. Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that they
were making songs  of  lamentation  for his fall,  for they caught  his name
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand.
Mithrandir, Mithrandir        sang  the Elves,     O Pilgrim Grey!        For  so  they
loved  to  call  him.  But if Legolas was with  the  Company,  he would  not
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for
him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song.
It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into  halting words.
