`Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You know
not what you say.  There is in her  and in  this land no evil, unless a  man
bring  it  hither himself.  Then let him beware!  But  tonight I shall sleep
without  fear  for the first time  since  I left Rivendell. And may  I sleep
deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in  heart.' He
cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once into a long sleep.
The others soon did the same, and no sound  or  dream  disturbed  their
slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day  was broad upon the
lawn before the pavilion.  and  the fountain rose and fell glittering in the
sun.
They remained some  days in Lothlurien, so  far as they could  tell  or
remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun  shone clear, save for
a gentle  rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all  things fresh
and clean. The air was cool and  soft, as if it were  early spring, yet they
felt about them the deep  and thoughtful quiet of winter.  It seemed to them
that they did little but  eat and drink and  rest, and walk among the trees;
and it was enough.
They had not seen  the Lord and Lady  again, and they had little speech
with the Elven-folk; for few of these  knew or would use the Westron tongue.
Haldir  had  bidden them  farewell and gone back again to the  fences of the
North, where great watch was  now kept since the tidings of Moria  that  the
Company had  brought. Legolas  was away much among the Galadhrim,  and
after
the  first  night  he  did not sleep with  the  other companions,  though he
returned  to  eat and talk with them. Often he  took Gimli with him  when he
went abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and
all  that  each had  known and seen of him came clear before their minds. As
they  were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew
more keen. Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that they
were making songs  of  lamentation  for his fall,  for they caught  his name
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand.
Mithrandir, Mithrandir        sang  the Elves,     O Pilgrim Grey!        For  so  they
loved  to  call  him.  But if Legolas was with  the  Company,  he would  not
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for
him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song.
It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into  halting words.
He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Rivendell he had
listened
and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that
others had made before him. But now as he sat beside the  fountain in Lurien
and heard  about  him the  voices of the Elves, his thought took shape  in a
song that seemed fair to him;  yet  when he  tried to repeat it to Sam  only
snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves.
When evening in the Shire was grey
his footsteps on the Hill were heard;
before the dawn he went away
on journey long without a word.
From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.
With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,
with bird on bough and beast in den,
in their own secret tongues he spoke.
A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a back that bent beneath its load;
a trumpet-voice, a burning brand,
a weary pilgrim on the road.
A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, quick to laugh;
an old man in a battered hat
who leaned upon a thorny staff.
He stood upon the bridge alone
and Fire and Shadow both defied;
his staff was broken on the stone,
in Khazad-dym his wisdom died.
`Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam.
'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the best I can do yet.'
'Well, Mr. Frodo, if  you  do have another go, I hope you'll say a word
about his fireworks,' said Sam. `Something like this:
The finest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of flowers.
Though that doesn't do them justice by a long road.'
`No,  I'll  leave that  to  you,  Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I
can't talk of  it any more. I can't bear to think  of bringing  the news  to
him.'
One  evening Frodo and Sam were walking  together in the cool twilight.
Both of them  felt restless again. On  Frodo suddenly the  shadow of parting
had fallen: he  knew somehow that the time was very near when  he must leave
Lothlurien.
`What do you think of Elves now, Sam?  ' he said. `I asked you the same
question once before-it  seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more
of them since then.'
'I  have  indeed!  ' said Sam. 'And I reckon  there's  Elves and Elves.
They're  all  elvish enough,  but they're not all the same. Now  these  folk
aren't wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes of us: they
seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they've
made the land, or  the  land's  made them, it's hard to say,  if you take my
meaning. It's  wonderfully  quiet here.  Nothing seems to  be going on,  and
nobody  seems to  want it to. If  there's any magic  about,  it's right down
deep, where I can't lay my hands on it, in a manner of speaking.'
'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo.
'Well,' said Sam, 'you can't see nobody working  it. No  fireworks like
poor Gandalf used to  show. I  wonder  we  don't see nothing of the Lord and
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that           she  could do some wonderful things,
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '
'I  wouldn't,' said Frodo.  `I am content.  And I don't  miss Gandalf's
fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.'
`You're right,'  said  Sam.  `And don't think I'm  finding  fault. I've
often wanted to  see a  bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but
I've never heard of a  better land than this. It's like being at home and on
a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All
