'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the best I can do yet.'
'Well, Mr. Frodo, if  you  do have another go, I hope you'll say a word
about his fireworks,' said Sam. `Something like this:
The finest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of flowers.
Though that doesn't do them justice by a long road.'
`No,  I'll  leave that  to  you,  Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I
can't talk of  it any more. I can't bear to think  of bringing  the news  to
him.'
One  evening Frodo and Sam were walking  together in the cool twilight.
Both of them  felt restless again. On  Frodo suddenly the  shadow of parting
had fallen: he  knew somehow that the time was very near when  he must leave
Lothlurien.
`What do you think of Elves now, Sam?  ' he said. `I asked you the same
question once before-it  seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more
of them since then.'
'I  have  indeed!  ' said Sam. 'And I reckon  there's  Elves and Elves.
They're  all  elvish enough,  but they're not all the same. Now  these  folk
aren't wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes of us: they
seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they've
made the land, or  the  land's  made them, it's hard to say,  if you take my
meaning. It's  wonderfully  quiet here.  Nothing seems to  be going on,  and
nobody  seems to  want it to. If  there's any magic  about,  it's right down
deep, where I can't lay my hands on it, in a manner of speaking.'
'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo.
'Well,' said Sam, 'you can't see nobody working  it. No  fireworks like
poor Gandalf used to  show. I  wonder  we  don't see nothing of the Lord and
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that           she  could do some wonderful things,
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '
'I  wouldn't,' said Frodo.  `I am content.  And I don't  miss Gandalf's
fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.'
`You're right,'  said  Sam.  `And don't think I'm  finding  fault. I've
often wanted to  see a  bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but
I've never heard of a  better land than this. It's like being at home and on
a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All
the same,  I'm beginning to feel that if we've got to go on,  then we'd best
get it over.
' It's the  job that's never started as takes longest  to finish        , as  my
old gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk  can do much more
to  help us, magic or no. It's  when we leave  this land that we shall  miss
Gandalf worse, I'm thinking.'
'I  am afraid that's only too  true, Sam,' said Frodo. `Yet I hope very
much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.'
Even as he spoke, they saw,  as if she  came in answer to their  words,
the  Lady Galadriel  approaching. Tall and white and fair she walked beneath
the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them.
Turning aside, she led them  toward  the southern slopes of the hill of
Caras Galadhon,  and passing through  a high green  hedge they  came into an
enclosed  garden. No trees  grew there,  and it  lay open  to the  sky.  The
evening star had risen and  was  shining with white  fire above  the western
woods.  Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into  a deep green hollow,
through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the  fountain
on  the hill.  At the bottom, upon a  low  pedestal  carved like a branching
tree, stood a basin  of silver.  wide  and shallow, and beside  it  stood  a
silver ewer.
With water from the stream Galadriel  filled the basin to the brim, and
breathed  on it, and when the water  was still again she spoke. `Here is the
Mirror  of Galadriel,'  she said.  'I have  brought you here so that you may
look in it, if you will.'
The air was very still, and the dell  was dark, and the Elf-lady beside
him was tall and pale. 'What shall we  look  for,  and what shall we  see? '
asked Frodo, filled with awe.
`Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,' she answered, `and to
some I can  show  what  they desire  to see. But the  Mirror will  also show
things unbidden,  and those  are  often stranger  and more  profitable  than
things which we  wish  to behold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror
free to work, I cannot tell.  For it shows things that were, and things that
are,  things  that yet may be. But which it is that he sees, even the wisest
cannot always tell. Do you wish to look? '
Frodo did not answer.
`And you? ' she said, turning to Sam. 'For this is what your folk would
call magic. I  believe;  though I  do not understand clearly what they mean;
and  they seem also to use  the  same word of the  deceits of the Enemy. But
this, if you will, is  the  magic of Galadriel. Did  you not  say  that  you
wished to see Elf-magic? '
'I did,' said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. `I'll
have a peep, Lady, if you're willing.'
`And I'd not mind  a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in an
aside to  Frodo.  'It seems a terrible  long time that  I've been  away. But
there, like  as  not I'll only  see the  stars,  or something that  I  won't
understand.'
'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle laugh. `But come,  you shall
look and see what you may. Do not touch the water! '
Sam climbed up  on  the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin.
The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it.
`There's only stars, as I thought,'  he said. Then he gave a  low gasp,
for  the stars went out. As if  a dark  veil had  been withdrawn, the Mirror
grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches  of trees
were waving and tossing in the  wind. But before Sam could make  up his mind
what it  was that he saw, the  light faded; and  now he thought he saw Frodo
with  a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed
to see  himself going along  a dim passage, and climbing an endless  winding
stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently  for  something,
but what it was he  did not know. Like a dream the vision  shifted and  went
back, and he  saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and
he could see what was  going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were
falling, crashing to the ground.
`Hi!' cried Sam  in  an  outraged  voice.  'There's  that Ted  Sandyman
a-cutting down trees as he  shouldn't. They didn't ought to be  felled: it's
that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I  wish I could
get at Ted, and I'd fell     him  !'
But  now  Sam  noticed  that the Old  Mill had  vanished,  and  a large
red-brick building was being put up  where it had stood. Lots of  folk  were
busily  at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby.  Black smoke seemed to
cloud the surface of the Mirror.
'There's some devilry at work in the Shire,' he said. 'Elrond knew what
he  was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.' Then suddenly Sam
gave
a cry and sprang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. `I must go home.
