and  they seem also to use  the  same word of the  deceits of the Enemy. But
this, if you will, is  the  magic of Galadriel. Did  you not  say  that  you
wished to see Elf-magic? '
'I did,' said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. `I'll
have a peep, Lady, if you're willing.'
`And I'd not mind  a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in an
aside to  Frodo.  'It seems a terrible  long time that  I've been  away. But
there, like  as  not I'll only  see the  stars,  or something that  I  won't
understand.'
'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle laugh. `But come,  you shall
look and see what you may. Do not touch the water! '
Sam climbed up  on  the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin.
The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it.
`There's only stars, as I thought,'  he said. Then he gave a  low gasp,
for  the stars went out. As if  a dark  veil had  been withdrawn, the Mirror
grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches  of trees
were waving and tossing in the  wind. But before Sam could make  up his mind
what it  was that he saw, the  light faded; and  now he thought he saw Frodo
with  a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed
to see  himself going along  a dim passage, and climbing an endless  winding
stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently  for  something,
but what it was he  did not know. Like a dream the vision  shifted and  went
back, and he  saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and
he could see what was  going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were
falling, crashing to the ground.
`Hi!' cried Sam  in  an  outraged  voice.  'There's  that Ted  Sandyman
a-cutting down trees as he  shouldn't. They didn't ought to be  felled: it's
that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I  wish I could
get at Ted, and I'd fell     him  !'
But  now  Sam  noticed  that the Old  Mill had  vanished,  and  a large
red-brick building was being put up  where it had stood. Lots of  folk  were
busily  at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby.  Black smoke seemed to
cloud the surface of the Mirror.
'There's some devilry at work in the Shire,' he said. 'Elrond knew what
he  was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.' Then suddenly Sam
gave
a cry and sprang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. `I must go home.
They've dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the  poor old gaffer  going down the
Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home! '
'You cannot go home alone,' said the Lady. 'You did not wish to go home
without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and  yet  you knew that
evil things might well be happening in the  Shire.  Remember that the Mirror
shows many things, and not all have yet come to pass. Some never come to be,
unless those that behold the visions turn aside  from their path to  prevent
them. The Mirror is dangerous as a guide of deeds.'
Sam  sat on  the  ground and  put his head in his hands. `I  wish I had
never come  here, and I don't want to see  no  more magic,' he said and fell
silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly, as if struggling with  tears.
`No, I'll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or  not at all,' he said.
`But I hope I  do  get  back some  day. If  what  I've  seen turns out true,
somebody's going to catch it hot! '
`Do you now  wish to look, Frodo? '  said  the Lady Galadriel. `You did
not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.'
`Do you advise me to look? ' asked Frodo.
'No,' she said. `I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am  not a
counsellor.  You may  learn something, and  whether what you  see be fair or
evil, that  may be profitable,  and yet it may not. Seeing is both good  and
perilous. Yet  I think, Frodo, that you have courage and  wisdom enough  for
the venture, or I would not have brought you here. Do as you will! '
`I will look,' said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent over
the  dark  water.  At once the Mirror  cleared  and  he  saw  a twilit land.
Mountains  loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A  long grey road
wound back out of sight.  Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint
and  small at  first,  but  growing  larger and  clearer  as it  approached.
Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded  him  of Gandalf. He  almost called
aloud the wizard's name, and then he saw that  the figure was clothed not in
grey but in  white, in  a white  that shone faintly in the dusk; and  in its
hand  there was  a white staff. The  head was so bowed that he could see  no
face,  and  presently the figure turned aside round  a bend in the road  and
went out  of  the Mirror's  view. Doubt came into Frodo's  mind:  was this a
vision of Gandalf on one of his  many  lonely  journeys long  ago, or was it
Saruman?
The vision now  changed. Brief and  small but  very vivid  he  caught a
glimpse of  Bilbo  walking restlessly about his room. The table was littered
with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows.
Then there  was a pause, and after  it many swift scenes followed  that
Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before
but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose  and raged in a great
storm. Then  he saw  against  the  Sun, sinking  blood-red into a  wrack  of
clouds,  the black outline  of a tall ship with torn sails riding up  out of
the  West.  Then a wide river flowing through a  populous city. Then a white
fortress with seven towers. And then again a ship with  black sails, but now
it was morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing
the  emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke  as of fire and battle
arose, and again the  sun went  down in a burning red that faded into a grey
mist; and into the mist a small  ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It
vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as  if a hole had
opened in the world  of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black
abyss there appeared a single Eye  that slowly grew. until it  filled nearly
all  the  Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to  cry
out  or  to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but  was itself
glazed, yellow as a cat's, watchful  and  intent, and  the black slit of its
pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew
with certainty  and  horror that  among  the  many things that it sought  he
himself  was one. But  he also knew that  it could not see him-not yet,  not
unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon its  chain  about his neck grew
heavy, heavier than a great stone,  and his  head was dragged downwards. The
Mirror  seemed  to be growing hot and  curls  of steam were rising  from the
water. He was slipping forward.
`Do not touch the water!' said the  Lady  Galadriel softly. The  vision
faded,  and Frodo found that he was  looking  at the cool stars twinkling in
the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady.
`I know what it was that you  last saw,' she said; `for that is also in
my mind. Do not be  afraid! But do  not think that only by singing  amid the
trees, nor  even by  the  slender arrows of  elven-bows,  is  this  land  of
Lothlurien maintained and defended against its  Enemy. I say  to you, Frodo,
that  even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my
