with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows.
Then there  was a pause, and after  it many swift scenes followed  that
Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before
but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose  and raged in a great
storm. Then  he saw  against  the  Sun, sinking  blood-red into a  wrack  of
clouds,  the black outline  of a tall ship with torn sails riding up  out of
the  West.  Then a wide river flowing through a  populous city. Then a white
fortress with seven towers. And then again a ship with  black sails, but now
it was morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing
the  emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke  as of fire and battle
arose, and again the  sun went  down in a burning red that faded into a grey
mist; and into the mist a small  ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It
vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as  if a hole had
opened in the world  of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black
abyss there appeared a single Eye  that slowly grew. until it  filled nearly
all  the  Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to  cry
out  or  to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but  was itself
glazed, yellow as a cat's, watchful  and  intent, and  the black slit of its
pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew
with certainty  and  horror that  among  the  many things that it sought  he
himself  was one. But  he also knew that  it could not see him-not yet,  not
unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon its  chain  about his neck grew
heavy, heavier than a great stone,  and his  head was dragged downwards. The
Mirror  seemed  to be growing hot and  curls  of steam were rising  from the
water. He was slipping forward.
`Do not touch the water!' said the  Lady  Galadriel softly. The  vision
faded,  and Frodo found that he was  looking  at the cool stars twinkling in
the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady.
`I know what it was that you  last saw,' she said; `for that is also in
my mind. Do not be  afraid! But do  not think that only by singing  amid the
trees, nor  even by  the  slender arrows of  elven-bows,  is  this  land  of
Lothlurien maintained and defended against its  Enemy. I say  to you, Frodo,
that  even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my
thought. But still the door is closed! '
She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards the East
in a  gesture of  rejection  and  denial. Edrendil, the Evening  Star,  most
beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it that the figure of
the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring
about  her  finger; it  glittered like  polished  gold overlaid  with silver
light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even-star had come down to
rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed
to him that he understood.
`Yes,' she said, divining his thought, `it is not permitted to speak of
it,  and  Elrond  could  not  do  so.  But  it  cannot  be  hidden from  the
Ring-bearer,  and  one who has seen  the Eye.  Verily it is in the  land  of
Lurien upon  the finger of Galadriel  that one of the Three remains. This is
Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper.
`He suspects, but  he  does not  know  --  not  yet. Do you not see now
wherefore your  coming is to us as  the footstep  of  Doom? For if you fail,
then we are  laid  bare to the Enemy.  Yet if you succeed, then our power is
diminished, and Lothlurien will fade, and the  tides  of  Time will sweep it
away. We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell  and
cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.'
Frodo bent his head. `And what do you wish? ' he said at last.
`That  what should be shall be,' she answered.  `The love of the  Elves
for  their land  and  their works is deeper than the deeps of  the Sea,  and
their regret  is  undying and cannot ever  wholly be assuaged. Yet they will
cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they know him  now.  For the
fate of Lothlurien you are not answerable but only for the doing of your own
task. Yet I  could wish, were it of any avail, that the One  Ring had  never
been wrought, or had remained for ever lost.'
'You are wise  and fearless  and fair, Lady  Galadriel,' said Frodo. `I
will give  you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for
me.'
Galadriel laughed  with a sudden clear laugh. `Wise the  Lady Galadriel
may be,' she said, `yet here she has met her match in  courtesy. Gently  are
you revenged for my testing of your heart at our first meeting. You begin to
see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to  ask
what you offer. For many long  years I  had pondered what I might do, should
the  Great  Ring come  into my hands, and behold!  it was brought  within my
grasp. The evil that was devised long ago  works on  in many  ways,  whether
Sauron himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set
to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?
`And now at last  it comes. You will give me the Ring  freely! In place
of  the Dark Lord  you will set up  a  Queen. And I shall  not  be dark, but
beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the
Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful as the Storm and the
Lightning!
Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair! '
She  lifted up her hand and from the  ring that she wore there issued a
great  light that  illuminated her  alone  and left all else dark. She stood
before  Frodo seeming  now  tall beyond  measurement, and  beautiful  beyond
enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light
faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and  lo! she was  shrunken: a slender
elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad.
'I pass the test,' she said. `I will diminish, and go into the West and
remain Galadriel.'
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke again.
`Let us return! ' she  said. `In the morning you must depart for now we have
chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.'
`I  would  ask  one thing before we go,'  said Frodo, `a  thing which I
often meant to  ask  Gandalf in Rivendell. I  am permitted to  wear  the One
Ring: why  cannot I see all the others  and know the thoughts  of those that
wear them? '
`You have not tried,' she said. `Only thrice have you set the Ring upon
your finger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try!  It would destroy
you.  Did not Gandalf tell  you that  the rings give power  according to the
measure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need
to
become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yet
even so, as Ring-bearer and as one that has borne it on finger and seen that
which is hidden, your sight is grown keener. You  have perceived  my thought
more clearly than many  that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that
holds the  Seven and the Nine.  And  did  you not see and recognize the ring
upon my finger? Did you see my ring? ' she asked turning again to Sam.
'No, Lady,' he  answered. `To tell you the truth, I  wondered what  you
were talking about.  I  saw a star through your finger. But if you'll pardon
