grasp. The evil that was devised long ago  works on  in many  ways,  whether
Sauron himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set
to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?
`And now at last  it comes. You will give me the Ring  freely! In place
of  the Dark Lord  you will set up  a  Queen. And I shall  not  be dark, but
beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the
Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful as the Storm and the
Lightning!
Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair! '
She  lifted up her hand and from the  ring that she wore there issued a
great  light that  illuminated her  alone  and left all else dark. She stood
before  Frodo seeming  now  tall beyond  measurement, and  beautiful  beyond
enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light
faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and  lo! she was  shrunken: a slender
elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad.
'I pass the test,' she said. `I will diminish, and go into the West and
remain Galadriel.'
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke again.
`Let us return! ' she  said. `In the morning you must depart for now we have
chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.'
`I  would  ask  one thing before we go,'  said Frodo, `a  thing which I
often meant to  ask  Gandalf in Rivendell. I  am permitted to  wear  the One
Ring: why  cannot I see all the others  and know the thoughts  of those that
wear them? '
`You have not tried,' she said. `Only thrice have you set the Ring upon
your finger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try!  It would destroy
you.  Did not Gandalf tell  you that  the rings give power  according to the
measure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need
to
become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yet
even so, as Ring-bearer and as one that has borne it on finger and seen that
which is hidden, your sight is grown keener. You  have perceived  my thought
more clearly than many  that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that
holds the  Seven and the Nine.  And  did  you not see and recognize the ring
upon my finger? Did you see my ring? ' she asked turning again to Sam.
'No, Lady,' he  answered. `To tell you the truth, I  wondered what  you
were talking about.  I  saw a star through your finger. But if you'll pardon
my speaking  out,  I think my master was right. I  wish you'd take his Ring.
You'd  put things  to  rights.  You'd  stop them digging up the  gaffer  and
turning him adrift. You'd make some folk pay for their dirty work.'
`I would,' she said. `That is how it would begin. But it would not stop
with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!'
Chapter 8. Farewell to Lurien
That  night  the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn,
and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeborn
spoke of their departure.
`Now is the time,' he  said, `when those who wish to continue the Quest
must harden their hearts to leave this land.  Those who no longer wish to go
forward may remain here, for a while. But whether they stay or go, none  can
be sure of  peace.  For we are come now to  the edge of doom. Here those who
wish  may await  the oncoming of the hour till either the ways of  the world
lie open again. or we summon them to the  last need of Lurien. Then they may
return to their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in
battle.'
There was a silence. `They all resolved to  go forward,' said Galadriel
looking in their eyes.
`As for me,' said Boromir, `my way home lies onward and not back.'
`That is true,' said Celeborn, `but is all this Company  going with you
to Minas Tirith? '
`We have not decided our course,' said Aragorn. 'Beyond Lothlurien I do
not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had
any clear purpose.'
`Maybe not,' said  Celeborn, `yet when you leave this land, you  can no
longer  forget  the Great  River.  As  some of you  know well, it  cannot be
crossed  by travellers with baggage between Lurien and Gondor, save by boat.
And are not the bridges  of Osgiliath broken down  and all the landings held
now by the Enemy?
`On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this
side, upon  the  west; but the straight road of the Quest  lies east of  the
River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take? '
`If my advice  is heeded, it will be the western shore,  and the way to
Minas Tirith,' answered Boromir.  `But I  am not the leader of the Company.'
The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled.
`I see that you do not yet know  what to do,' said Celeborn. `It is not
my  part to choose for you; but I will help you as  I  may.  There are  some
