Chapter 8. Farewell to Lurien
That  night  the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn,
and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeborn
spoke of their departure.
`Now is the time,' he  said, `when those who wish to continue the Quest
must harden their hearts to leave this land.  Those who no longer wish to go
forward may remain here, for a while. But whether they stay or go, none  can
be sure of  peace.  For we are come now to  the edge of doom. Here those who
wish  may await  the oncoming of the hour till either the ways of  the world
lie open again. or we summon them to the  last need of Lurien. Then they may
return to their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in
battle.'
There was a silence. `They all resolved to  go forward,' said Galadriel
looking in their eyes.
`As for me,' said Boromir, `my way home lies onward and not back.'
`That is true,' said Celeborn, `but is all this Company  going with you
to Minas Tirith? '
`We have not decided our course,' said Aragorn. 'Beyond Lothlurien I do
not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had
any clear purpose.'
`Maybe not,' said  Celeborn, `yet when you leave this land, you  can no
longer  forget  the Great  River.  As  some of you  know well, it  cannot be
crossed  by travellers with baggage between Lurien and Gondor, save by boat.
And are not the bridges  of Osgiliath broken down  and all the landings held
now by the Enemy?
`On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this
side, upon  the  west; but the straight road of the Quest  lies east of  the
River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take? '
`If my advice  is heeded, it will be the western shore,  and the way to
Minas Tirith,' answered Boromir.  `But I  am not the leader of the Company.'
The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled.
`I see that you do not yet know  what to do,' said Celeborn. `It is not
my  part to choose for you; but I will help you as  I  may.  There are  some
among  you who can handle  boats: Legolas, whose folk know  the swift Forest
River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.'
`And  one Hobbit! ' cried Merry. `Not all of us look on  boats as  wild
horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.'
`That is  well,' said Celeborn. `Then I will furnish  your Company with
boats. They must be small and light, for  if you go far  by water, there are
places where you will be forced to  carry them. You will come to  the rapids
of Sarn  Gebir,  and maybe at  last to the  great falls of  Rauros where the
River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there  are other perils. Boats may
make your journey less toilsome for  a while.  Yet they  will  not  give you
counsel:  in the  end  you must leave  them and the River, and turn  west-or
east.'
Aragorn  thanked  Celeborn  many times. The gift of boats comforted him
much, not least because there would now be no  need to decide his course for
some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils  lay ahead,
it seemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to
plod  forward  with  bent backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still
thought boats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not  all the dangers that
he had survived made him think better of them.
`All shall be prepared for you and await you  at the  haven before noon
tomorrow,'  said  Celeborn.  'I will send my people to you in the morning to
help you make ready for the journey. Now we will  wish  you all a fair night
and untroubled sleep.'
'Good  night,  my friends!  ' said Galadriel.  'Sleep in peace! Do  not
trouble your  hearts overmuch with thought of  the road tonight.  Maybe  the
paths that  you each  shall tread are  already laid before your feet, though
you do not see them. Good night! '
The  Company  now  took  their leave  and  returned to their  pavilion.
Legolas  went with them, for this  was to be their last night in Lothlurien,
and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take counsel together.
For a  long time they debated what they should do, and  how it would be
best to attempt the fulfilling of their purpose with the Ring: but they came
to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired to go  first to Minas
Tirith, and to  escape at least for a while from  the  terror of  the Enemy.
They would have been willing to follow a leader  over the River and into the
shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke  no word, and Aragorn was still divided in
his mind.
His  own  plan, while Gandalf remained with  them, had been to go  with
Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he believed that the
message of the dreams was a summons, and that the hour had come at last
when
the  heir of  Elendil  should  come  forth and  strive with  Sauron  for the
mastery. But in Moria  the burden of Gandalf had been laid  on  him; and  he
knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in  the end to
go with  Boromir. And  yet what help could he or any of the Company give  to
Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?
`I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,' said
Boromir; and after  that he was  silent  for a while,  sitting with his eyes
fixed  on Frodo, as if  he was trying  to  read the Halfling's thoughts.  At
length he spoke  again, softly, as if he was debating  with himself. `If you
wish only to destroy  the Ring,' he said,  `then there is little use in  war
and weapons; and the Men of Minas  Tirith  cannot  help.  But if you wish to
destroy the armed might  of the  Dark Lord,  then it is folly  to go without
force into his domain; and folly  to throw away.' He  paused suddenly, as if
he had  become aware that he was  speaking his thoughts aloud. `It  would be
folly  to  throw  lives away,  I  mean,' he ended. `It is  a choice  between
defending a  strong place  and  walking openly  into the arms  of death.  At
least, that is how I see it.'
Frodo caught something  new  and strange  in  Boromir's glance, and  he
looked hard at  him.  Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said
something like this  at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn,  but he seemed  deep in  his own thought
and made no sign that he  had  heeded Boromir's words.  And so  their debate
ended. Merry and Pippin were  already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The
night
was growing old.
In the  morning, as they were  beginning  to  pack their slender goods,
Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts
of food and clothing for the  journey.  The food was  mostly in the  form of
very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside,
and inside  was  the colour of  cream. Gimli took  up one  of  the cakes and
looked at it with a doubtful eye.
` Cram ,' he said  under his breath,  as he broke off a crisp corner  and
