His  own  plan, while Gandalf remained with  them, had been to go  with
Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he believed that the
message of the dreams was a summons, and that the hour had come at last
when
the  heir of  Elendil  should  come  forth and  strive with  Sauron  for the
mastery. But in Moria  the burden of Gandalf had been laid  on  him; and  he
knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in  the end to
go with  Boromir. And  yet what help could he or any of the Company give  to
Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?
`I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,' said
Boromir; and after  that he was  silent  for a while,  sitting with his eyes
fixed  on Frodo, as if  he was trying  to  read the Halfling's thoughts.  At
length he spoke  again, softly, as if he was debating  with himself. `If you
wish only to destroy  the Ring,' he said,  `then there is little use in  war
and weapons; and the Men of Minas  Tirith  cannot  help.  But if you wish to
destroy the armed might  of the  Dark Lord,  then it is folly  to go without
force into his domain; and folly  to throw away.' He  paused suddenly, as if
he had  become aware that he was  speaking his thoughts aloud. `It  would be
folly  to  throw  lives away,  I  mean,' he ended. `It is  a choice  between
defending a  strong place  and  walking openly  into the arms  of death.  At
least, that is how I see it.'
Frodo caught something  new  and strange  in  Boromir's glance, and  he
looked hard at  him.  Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said
something like this  at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn,  but he seemed  deep in  his own thought
and made no sign that he  had  heeded Boromir's words.  And so  their debate
ended. Merry and Pippin were  already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The
night
was growing old.
In the  morning, as they were  beginning  to  pack their slender goods,
Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts
of food and clothing for the  journey.  The food was  mostly in the  form of
very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside,
and inside  was  the colour of  cream. Gimli took  up one  of  the cakes and
looked at it with a doubtful eye.
` Cram ,' he said  under his breath,  as he broke off a crisp corner  and
nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and  he ate  all the rest  of
the cake with relish.
`No more,  no  more!' cried the  Elves laughing. `You have eaten enough
already for a long day's march.'
`I thought  it was  only a kind of       cram   , such as  the Dale-men make for
journeys in the wild,' said the Dwarf.
`So it is,' they answered.  `But we call it         lembas    or waybread, and it
is more strengthening than any food made  by Men, and  it  is more  pleasant
than  cram   , by all accounts.'
`Indeed it is,' said Gimli.  'Why it is better than  the honey-cakes of
the Beornings,  and  that  is great praise,  for the Beornings  are the best
bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes
to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! '
'All the same, we bid you spare the food,' they  said. 'Eat little at a
time,  and only at need. For these things  are given to  serve  you when all
else fails.  The  cakes  will keep sweet  for  many many  days, if  they are
unbroken and left in their leaf-wrappings, as we have brought them. One will
keep a traveller on his feet for a day of  long labour, even if he be one of
the tall Men of Minas Tirith.'
The  Elves next unwrapped  and gave to each  of the Company the clothes
they  had  brought.  For  each they  had  provided a  hood  and cloak,  made
according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim
wove. It was  hard to say of what  colour they were:  grey with  the hue  of
twilight under  the trees they seemed  to be; and yet if they were moved, or
set in another light, they were green as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow
fields by  night, dusk-silver  as  water under  the  stars. Each  cloak  was
fastened about the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver.
`Are these magic cloaks? ' asked Pippin, looking at them with wonder.
`I do  not  know what you mean by  that,' answered  the  leader  of the
Elves. `They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was made in this
land. They are elvish robes certainly, if that is what  you  mean. Leaf  and
branch, water and  stone: they have the hue and beauty  of all  these things
under the twilight of Lurien that we  love; for  we  put the thought of  all
that we love into all that  we make. Yet they  are garments, not armour, and
they  will not turn shaft or blade. But they should serve you well: they are
light to wear, and warm enough  or cool enough at  need.  And  you will find
them a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you
walk among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of the
Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have
we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.'
After  their morning meal the Company said farewell to  the lawn by the
fountain.  Their  hearts  were  heavy;  for it was a fair  place, and it had
become like home to  them,  though they could not count the days and  nights
that they had passed there. As they stood for a moment looking at the  white
water in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass
of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight.
'I have  returned from the  Northern  Fences,'  said the Elf, `and I am
sent  now  to be your guide again.  The Dimrill Dale is  full of vapour  and
clouds of  smoke,  and the  mountains are troubled. There are noises in  the
deeps  of the  earth. If any of you had thought  of returning northwards  to
your homes, you would not have been able to pass  that  way. But come!  Your
path now goes south.'
As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty; but in
the trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They
themselves
went  silently. At last Haldir  led them down the  southward  slopes  of the
hill, and they came again  to  the great  gate hung with  lamps, and to  the
white  bridge; and so they  passed out and left the city of the Elves.  Then
they turned  away from the paved road  and took  a path that went off into a
deep  thicket  of  mallorn-trees,  and passed  on,  winding through  rolling
woodlands  of  silver  shadow,  leading   them  ever  down,  southwards  and
eastwards, towards the shores of the River.
They had gone  some ten miles and noon  was at hand when they came on a
high green  wall. Passing through  an opening they came  suddenly out of the
trees. Before them  lay a  long  lawn of shining grass, studded  with golden
elanor     that  glinted  in the sun.  The lawn ran  out  into a narrow  tongue
between  bright margins:  on  the  right  and  west  the  Silverlode  flowed
glittering; on the left and  east the Great River  rolled its broad  waters,
deep and  dark.  On  the  further  shores the  woodlands  still  marched  on
southwards as far as the eye could see, but  all the banks  were  bleak  and
bare. No mallorn lifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lurien.
On  the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of
the  streams,  there was a hythe of white stones and  white wood. By it were
moored many boats and  barges.  Some were  brightly painted, and shone  with
