with invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as  he
was  bending over a  pool, he felt a burning  on the back of his head) and a
dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for he
had almost forgotten about  the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and
shook his fist at her.
'But  as  he  lowered his eyes, he saw far above  the tops of the Misty
Mountains, out of which the stream came.  And he thought suddenly: "It would
be cool and shady under  those mountains. The Sun could not  watch me there.
The  roots  of those mountains  must be  roots indeed; there  must be  great
secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning."
'So he journeyed by night up into  the highlands, and he found a little
cave  out of which the dark stream ran; and  he wormed his way like a maggot
into the heart of the  hills, and vanished  out  of all  knowledge. The Ring
went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had
begun
to grow again, could learn nothing of it.'
'Gollum!' cried  Frodo. 'Gollum? Do  you mean  that this  is  the  very
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!'
'I  think  it  is  a sad  story,' said the  wizard, 'and it might  have
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.'
'I  can't  believe  that  Gollum  was  connected with  hobbits, however
distantly,' said Frodo with some heat. 'What an abominable notion!'
'It is  true all  the same,' replied Gandalf. 'About their  origins, at
any  rate, I know  more than hobbits  do themselves. And even  Bilbo's story
suggests the kinship. There  was  a  great  deal in the background  of their
minds  and memories  that was  very  similar.  They  understood one  another
remarkably well,  very much  better  than a hobbit would  understand, say, a
Dwarf, or an Orc, or even  an Elf. Think of the riddles they both  knew, for
one thing.'
'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and
of  much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat.  Gollum  meant to cheat all
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo  off his guard. And I daresay
it amused his wickedness  to  start a game which might end  in providing him
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.'
'Only too true, I fear,' said Gandalf. 'But there was something else in
it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly  ruined. He
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed -as a hobbit
might. There  was a little  corner of  his mind that was still  his own, and
light  came  through it, as  through  a  chink in the dark: light out of the
past.  It was actually  pleasant,  I think,  to  hear  a kindly voice again,
bringing up memories  of wind,  and trees, and sun  on the  grass, and  such
forgotten things.
'But that, of  course, would only make the evil  part of him angrier in
the end - unless it could  be conquered.  Unless it could be cured.' Gandalf
sighed. 'Alas! there is little hope of  that for him. Yet  not  no hope. No,
not  though  he  possessed  the Ring so  long, almost  as far back as he can
remember. For it was long since he  had worn it much:  in the black darkness
it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never "faded".  He is  thin and tough
still. But the  thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had
become almost unbearable.
'All the "great secrets" under the mountains had turned  out to be just
empty night: there was  nothing more to find out,  nothing worth doing, only
nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.  He was altogether wretched.
He hated the  dark,  and  he hated light more: he hated  everything, and the
Ring most of all.'
'What  do you mean?' said Frodo. 'Surely the Ring was his  precious and
the only thing he cared for?  But if he  hated it,  why didn't he get rid of
it, or go away and leave it?'
'You  ought to  begin to understand, Frodo,  after all you have heard,'
said Gandalf. 'He  hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved  himself. He
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter.
It
'A  Ring  of  Power  looks   after  itself,  Frodo.     may  slip  off
treacherously, but its keeper never  abandons it. At most he  plays with the
idea of handing  it on  to someone else's care - and  that  only at an early
stage, when it first  begins  to grip. But  as  far as I know Bilbo alone in
history has ever gone beyond playing, and  really done it.  He needed all my
help, too. And even  so he would never  have just  forsaken  it, or  cast it
aside. It  was not Gollum, Frodo, but the  Ring  itself that decided things.
The Ring left     him.'
'What, just in time  to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an  Orc have
suited it better?'
'It  is no laughing  matter,'  said Gandalf. 'Not for you.  It was  the
strangest event in the  whole history of the  Ring so far:  Bilbo's  arrival
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.
'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The  Ring was  trying to
get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him;
then when a  chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after
that Gollum,  and it had devoured him. It could make  no further use of him:
he was too  small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never
leave his deep pool again. So  now, when its master was awake  once more and
sending out his dark  thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to
be
picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!
'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the
Ring-maker.  I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was                   meant     to
find the Ring, and      not  by its maker.  In which  case you  also were             meant   to
have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.'
It  is  not,' said Frodo. "Though I am not sure  that I understand you.
But how have you  learned all this about the Ring, and about  Gollum? Do you
really know it all, or are you just guessing still?'
Gandalf looked  at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much  and I have
learned much,' he answered. 'But I am not going to give an account of all my
doings to    you.  The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is  known
to all the  Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire-writing
alone, apart from any  other evidence.' 'And  when  did you discover  that?'
asked Frodo, interrupting. 'Just  now in this room, of course,' answered the
wizard sharply.  'But  I expected to  find  it.  I have come back  from dark
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof,  and
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the
gap in the history, required some  thought. I may have  started with guesses
about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.'
'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement.
'Yes. The obvious thing to do, of  course, if  one  could. I tried long
ago; but I have managed it at last.'
'Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?'
'Not so  clearly.  What I  have told you is what Gollum was  willing to
tell - though not, of course, in the  way  I have  reported it. Gollum  is a
liar,  and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the  Ring his
"birthday  present",  and he  stuck  to  that.  He  said it  came  from  his
grandmother, who  had lots  of beautiful  things of  that kind. A ridiculous
story. I have no doubt  that Smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch,  a great
