walk among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of the
Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have
we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.'
After  their morning meal the Company said farewell to  the lawn by the
fountain.  Their  hearts  were  heavy;  for it was a fair  place, and it had
become like home to  them,  though they could not count the days and  nights
that they had passed there. As they stood for a moment looking at the  white
water in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass
of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight.
'I have  returned from the  Northern  Fences,'  said the Elf, `and I am
sent  now  to be your guide again.  The Dimrill Dale is  full of vapour  and
clouds of  smoke,  and the  mountains are troubled. There are noises in  the
deeps  of the  earth. If any of you had thought  of returning northwards  to
your homes, you would not have been able to pass  that  way. But come!  Your
path now goes south.'
As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty; but in
the trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They
themselves
went  silently. At last Haldir  led them down the  southward  slopes  of the
hill, and they came again  to  the great  gate hung with  lamps, and to  the
white  bridge; and so they  passed out and left the city of the Elves.  Then
they turned  away from the paved road  and took  a path that went off into a
deep  thicket  of  mallorn-trees,  and passed  on,  winding through  rolling
woodlands  of  silver  shadow,  leading   them  ever  down,  southwards  and
eastwards, towards the shores of the River.
They had gone  some ten miles and noon  was at hand when they came on a
high green  wall. Passing through  an opening they came  suddenly out of the
trees. Before them  lay a  long  lawn of shining grass, studded  with golden
elanor     that  glinted  in the sun.  The lawn ran  out  into a narrow  tongue
between  bright margins:  on  the  right  and  west  the  Silverlode  flowed
glittering; on the left and  east the Great River  rolled its broad  waters,
deep and  dark.  On  the  further  shores the  woodlands  still  marched  on
southwards as far as the eye could see, but  all the banks  were  bleak  and
bare. No mallorn lifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lurien.
On  the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of
the  streams,  there was a hythe of white stones and  white wood. By it were
moored many boats and  barges.  Some were  brightly painted, and shone  with
silver and gold  and green, but most were either  white or grey. Three small
grey boats had been made ready for  the travellers, and  in  these the Elves
stowed their goods. And they added  also coils of rope, three  to each boat.
Slender they looked, but strong,  silken  to the touch, grey of hue like the
elven-cloaks.
`What  are  these?  '  asked  Sam,  handling  one  that  lay  upon  the
greensward.
`Ropes indeed! ' answered an Elf  from the  boats.  'Never  travel  far
without  a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such  are these.
They may be a help in many needs.'
'You don't  need to  tell me  that! ' said Sam. `I came without any and
I've been worried ever since. But I was wondering  what these  were made of,
knowing a bit about rope-making: it's in the family as you might say.'
`They are made of      hithlain  ,' said the Elf, `but there is no time now to
instruct  you  in  the  art of their making. Had we  known that  this  craft
delighted  you, we  could  have taught  you  much. But  now alas! unless you
should at some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it
serve you well! '
`Come! ' said Haldir.  `All is now ready  for you. Enter the boats! But
take care at first! '
'Heed the words! ' said the other  Elves. 'These boats are light-built,
and they are crafty and  unlike the boats of other folk. They will not sink,
lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It would be  wise
if you accustomed yourselves to stepping  in and out,  here where there is a
landing-place, before you set off downstream.'
The Company  was  arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in
one boat; Boromir,  Merry,  and Pippin  in another; and  in the  third  were
Legolas and Gimli, who  had now become fast friends. In this last boat  most
of  the goods and packs were  stowed. The boats were moved and  steered with
short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all  was ready
Aragorn led them  on a trial up  the Silverlode. The current  was  swift and
they went  forward slowly. Sam sat  in the  bows,  clutching the  sides, and
looking back wistfully to  the  shore. The sunlight  glittering on the water
dazzled his eyes.  As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue,  the
trees  drew down to the  river's  brink. Here and there golden leaves tossed
and floated on the  rippling stream.  The air was very bright and still, and
there was a silence, except for the high distant song of larks.
They turned a sharp bend in  the river, and there, sailing proudly down
the stream toward them, they saw a  swan of great size. The water rippled on
either  side of the white  breast beneath its curving neck. Its  beak  shone
like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its
huge white wings  were half lifted.  A music came down the river as it  drew
nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was  a ship, wrought  and carved
with elven-skill in the likeness of  a bird. Two elves clad in white steered
it  with  black paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind
him  stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her
hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and  she sang. Sad and  sweet was the
sound of her voice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.
Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,
In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.
There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears.
O Lurien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day;
The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away.
O Lurien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me,
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea?
Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The Lady ended
her  song and greeted them. `We have come to bid you our last farewell,' she
said, `and to speed you with blessings from our land.'
`Though  you have  been our guests,'  said Celeborn, `you have  not yet
eaten with  us, and we  bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between
the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lurien.'
The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their boats and
followed it. There in the last  end  of  Egladil  upon  the  green grass the
parting feast was held;  but Frodo ate  and drank  little,  heeding only the
beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible,
nor  filled with hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men of later
days Elves still  at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision
