They turned a sharp bend in  the river, and there, sailing proudly down
the stream toward them, they saw a  swan of great size. The water rippled on
either  side of the white  breast beneath its curving neck. Its  beak  shone
like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its
huge white wings  were half lifted.  A music came down the river as it  drew
nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was  a ship, wrought  and carved
with elven-skill in the likeness of  a bird. Two elves clad in white steered
it  with  black paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind
him  stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her
hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and  she sang. Sad and  sweet was the
sound of her voice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.
Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,
In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.
There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears.
O Lurien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day;
The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away.
O Lurien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me,
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea?
Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The Lady ended
her  song and greeted them. `We have come to bid you our last farewell,' she
said, `and to speed you with blessings from our land.'
`Though  you have  been our guests,'  said Celeborn, `you have  not yet
eaten with  us, and we  bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between
the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lurien.'
The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their boats and
followed it. There in the last  end  of  Egladil  upon  the  green grass the
parting feast was held;  but Frodo ate  and drank  little,  heeding only the
beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible,
nor  filled with hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men of later
days Elves still  at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision
of that  which has already been left far behind by  the  flowing  streams of
Time.
After they had eaten and drunk,  sitting upon the grass, Celeborn spoke
to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed south to the
woods beyond the Tongue.
`As you go down the water,' he said, `you will find that the trees will
fail, and you  will come to a barren country. There the River flows in stony
vale amid  high moors, until at last after many leagues it comes to the tall
island  of the Tindrock,  that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its  arms
about the steep shores of the  isle, and falls then  with a  great noise and
smoke  over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it
is called in your  tongue.  That  is a wide region of sluggish fen where the
stream becomes tortuous and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by
many
mouths from the Forest of  Fangorn  in the west. About that stream, on  this
side of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills
of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they look out over
the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of
Mordor.
'Boromir, and any  that go with him seeking  Minas Tirith, will do well
to leave the Great River  above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds
the marshes.  Yet  they  should  not  go too far  up  that  stream, nor risk
becoming entangled in the  Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is
now  little  known. But  Boromir  and Aragorn  doubtless  do  not  need this
warning.'
'Indeed we have heard  of Fangorn in  Minas Tirith,' said Boromir. `But
what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives' tales, such as we
tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is now  to us so far away
that fancy can wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay  upon the  borders of
our realm; but it is now many lives of men since  any of  us  visited it, to
prove or disprove the legends that have come down from distant years.
`I have myself  been at whiles in Rohan, but I have  never  crossed  it
northwards. When I  was sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap by
the skirts  of the White Mountains,  and crossed the Isen  and the Greyflood
into Northerland.  A  long and wearisome  journey.  Four  hundred  leagues I
reckoned it, and it took me many  months; for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at
the fording  of  the  Greyflood. After that  journey,  and  the road  I have
trodden  with  this Company, I  do  not much doubt  that I shall find a  way
through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.'
`Then  I need say no more,' said Celeborn. 'But do not despise the lore
that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance  that old wives
keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.'
Now Galadriel rose  from the grass, and taking a  cup  from one  of her
maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn.
'Now it is time  to drink the cup of  farewell,' she said. `Drink, Lord
of  the Galadhrim!  And let not your heart be  sad though night  must follow
noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.'
Then  she brought  the  cup to each of the Company, and bade them drink
and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on the
grass,  and  chairs were set  for her and  for Celeborn.  Her maidens  stood
silent about her, and a while  she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke
again.
'We have drunk  the cup of  parting,' she  said, `and the  shadows fall
between us. But  before you go,  I have brought in  my ship gifts  which the
Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer  you in memory of Lothlurien.'
Then
she called to each in turn.
`Here is  the gift  of Celeborn  and  Galadriel to the  leader  of your
Company,' she  said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made
to fit his sword.  It was  overlaid  with  a  tracery of flowers  and leaves
wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven runes formed of many
gems the name And®ril and the lineage of the sword.
`The  blade  that  is  drawn from  this  sheath shall not be stained or
broken  even in  defeat,' she said. `But is there aught else that you desire
of me at our parting? For  darkness will flow between us, and it may be that
we shall  not meet  again, unless it be far  hence upon  a  road that has no
returning.'
And Aragorn answered: 'Lady, you know  all my desire, and  long held in
keeping the only  treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even
if you would; and only through darkness shall I come to it.'
`Yet maybe this will lighten  your heart,' said Galadriel;  `for it was
left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.' Then
she lifted from  her lap  a  great stone  of a clear green, set in  a silver
brooch that  was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with  outspread  wings;
