trodden  with  this Company, I  do  not much doubt  that I shall find a  way
through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.'
`Then  I need say no more,' said Celeborn. 'But do not despise the lore
that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance  that old wives
keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.'
Now Galadriel rose  from the grass, and taking a  cup  from one  of her
maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn.
'Now it is time  to drink the cup of  farewell,' she said. `Drink, Lord
of  the Galadhrim!  And let not your heart be  sad though night  must follow
noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.'
Then  she brought  the  cup to each of the Company, and bade them drink
and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on the
grass,  and  chairs were set  for her and  for Celeborn.  Her maidens  stood
silent about her, and a while  she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke
again.
'We have drunk  the cup of  parting,' she  said, `and the  shadows fall
between us. But  before you go,  I have brought in  my ship gifts  which the
Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer  you in memory of Lothlurien.'
Then
she called to each in turn.
`Here is  the gift  of Celeborn  and  Galadriel to the  leader  of your
Company,' she  said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made
to fit his sword.  It was  overlaid  with  a  tracery of flowers  and leaves
wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven runes formed of many
gems the name And®ril and the lineage of the sword.
`The  blade  that  is  drawn from  this  sheath shall not be stained or
broken  even in  defeat,' she said. `But is there aught else that you desire
of me at our parting? For  darkness will flow between us, and it may be that
we shall  not meet  again, unless it be far  hence upon  a  road that has no
returning.'
And Aragorn answered: 'Lady, you know  all my desire, and  long held in
keeping the only  treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even
if you would; and only through darkness shall I come to it.'
`Yet maybe this will lighten  your heart,' said Galadriel;  `for it was
left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.' Then
she lifted from  her lap  a  great stone  of a clear green, set in  a silver
brooch that  was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with  outspread  wings;
and as  she held  it  up  the gem flashed  like the sun shining through  the
leaves  of spring. `This  stone I  gave to Celebrnan my daughter, and she to
hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In this hour take the name
that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the house of Elendil! '
Then Aragorn took  the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast, and
those  who  saw  him wondered; for they  had  not marked before how tall and
kingly  he stood, and it seemed to them that many years of toil  had  fallen
from his shoulders. `For the  gifts that you have  given me I thank you,' he
said, 'O Lady of  Lurien of whom were sprung Celebrnan  and Arwen
Evenstar.
What praise could I say more? '
The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boromir, and to him she
gave a belt of gold; and to  Merry  and Pippin  she gave small silver belts,
each  with a  clasp wrought like a golden flower. To Legolas she  gave a bow
such as  the Galadhrim used,  longer and  stouter than the bows of Mirkwood,
and strung with a string of elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows.
`For you little gardener and lover of trees,' she said to  Sam, `I have
only a small gift.' She put into his hand a little box of plain  grey  wood,
unadorned save for  a single silver rune upon the lid.  `Here  is set  G for
Galadriel,' she said; `but  also it may stand  for garden in your tongue. In
this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing  as Galadriel has
still to bestow  is upon it. It will not keep  you on your  road, nor defend
you  against any peril; but if you keep it and see your  home again at last,
then perhaps it may reward  you.  Though you should find all barren and laid
waste, there will be  few gardens in  Middle-earth that will bloom like your
garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may  remember  Galadriel,
and catch a glimpse  far off  of Lurien,  that you  have  seen  only  in our
winter.  For our spring and our summer are gone  by,  and they will never be
seen on earth again save in memory.'
Sam  went  red  to  the  ears  and muttered something inaudible, as  he
clutched the box and bowed as well as he could.
`And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? ' said Galadriel turning
to Gimli.
`None,  Lady,' answered Gimli. `It is  enough for  me  to have seen the
Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.'
`Hear all ye Elves! ' she cried to those about her. `Let none say again
that Dwarves  are grasping  and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli son of  Gluin,
you desire something that I could give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be
the only guest without a gift.'
`There  is  nothing,  Lady  Galadriel,'  said  Gimli,  bowing  low  and
stammering. `Nothing, unless it might be-unless it is permitted to ask. nay,
to name a single strand of your hair, which  surpasses the gold of the earth
as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But
you commanded me to name my desire.'
The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborn gazed at
the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. 'It is said that the  skill of the
Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues ' she said; `yet that
is not true of Gimli. For  none have ever  made to me a request  so bold and
yet so  courteous. And  how shall I  refuse, since I commanded him to speak?
But tell me, what would you do with such a gift? '
`Treasure it, Lady,' he answered, `in memory of your words to me at our
first meeting. And if ever I return to the  smithies of my home, it shall be
set in imperishable crystal to  be an heirloom of my house, and a  pledge of
good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.'
Then the  Lady unbraided  one  of her long tresses, and  cut off  three
golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli's hand. `These words shall  go with the
gift,' she said. `I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now vain: on the
one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But if  hope  should not
fail, then I say to you, Gimli son of Gluin, that your hands shall flow with
gold, and yet over you gold shall have no dominion.
`And you, Ring-bearer,' she said, turning to Frodo. `I come to you last
who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared  this.' She held up
a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays of white light
sprang from  her hand.  'In this  phial,' she said, `is  caught the light of
Edrendil's  star,  set amid  the  waters of my fountain. It will shine still
brighter when night is  about you. May it be a  light to you in dark places,
when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! '
Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them, he saw
her  again  standing  like a  queen,  great and  beautiful,  but  no  longer
terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say.
Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to  the  hythe. A yellow
noon lay  on the  green land  of  the Tongue, and  the water  glittered with
silver. All at last was  made  ready. The Company took  their places in  the
boats as  before. Crying farewell, the Elves of Lurien with long  grey poles
