Nambril! Nai hiruvalyl Valimar.
Nai elyl hiruva. Nambril!
`Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the  wind,  long years numberless  as
the  wings of trees!  The long years have passed like  swift draughts of the
sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue  vaults of Varda
wherein the stars  tremble  in the  song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who
now shall refill  the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda,  the  Queen of
the Stars,  from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all
paths are drowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on
the foaming waves between  us, and mist  covers the jewels of Calacirya  for
ever. Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou
shalt find Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt find it. Farewell!  ' Varda is the
name of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth.
Suddenly the River  swept round a bend, and the banks rose  upon either
side, and the light of Lurien was hidden. To that fair land Frodo never came
again.
The travellers  now  turned their faces  to  the journey;  the  sun was
before  them, and their  eyes were dazzled, for all were  filled with tears.
Gimli wept openly.
`I have  looked  the  last  upon that which was  fairest,' he  said  to
Legolas his companion. `Henceforward I will call  nothing fair, unless it be
her gift.' He put his hand to his breast.
`Tell me,  Legolas, why  did I  come on this Quest?  Little did I  know
where  the  chief peril  lay!  Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we  could not
foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark was the danger
that I feared, and it did not hold me back. But I would not have come, had I
known the  danger of light and joy. Now I have taken my worst wound in  this
parting, even if I were to go this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for
Gimli son of Gluin! '
`Nay! ' said Legolas. `Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world
in these after-days. For  such is the  way of  it:  to find and lose,  as it
seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed,
Gimli son of Gluin: for your loss you suffer of your own  free will, and you
might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken  your companions,
and
the least reward that you shall have is that  the memory of Lothlurien shall
remain ever clear  and unstained in your heart, and  shall neither  fade nor
grow stale.'
`Maybe,' said  Gimli;  `and  I  thank you  for  your words.  True words
doubtless; yet all  such  comfort  is cold.  Memory  is not  what  the heart
desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zvram. Or  so says the
heart  of Gimli  the Dwarf. Elves  may see  things otherwise.  Indeed I have
heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream.
Not so for Dwarves.
'But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in the
water with all this baggage, and  the Great River is swift. I do not wish to
drown my grief in cold water.' He took up  a paddle, and steered towards the
western bank, following Aragorn's boat ahead, which had already moved out of
the middle stream.
So the  Company went on their long way, down the wide  hurrying waters,
borne ever  southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they could
not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze died  away and the River
flowed without a sound. No voice  of  bird broke the silence.  The  sun grew
misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky  like a high white
pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk came  early, followed by a grey
and  starless night. Far into the dark quiet hours they  floated on, guiding
their boats under the overhanging shadows  of the western woods. Great trees
passed  by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty  roots  through  the
mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and  listened to
the  faint lap and  gurgle  of  the River fretting among the  tree-roots and
driftwood near the shore, until  his  head nodded and he fell into an uneasy
sleep.
Chapter 9. The Great River
Frodo  was roused  by Sam. He found  that  he was  lying, well wrapped,
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west
bank of the  Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night  away, and the grey
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire
near at hand.
They started  again  before  the day  was broad.  Not that most of  the
Company were eager to hurry southwards: they were content that the decision,
which they must make at  latest  when they came  to  Rauros and the Tindrock
Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River  bear them on at its
own  pace,  having no desire to hasten  towards  the perils that lay beyond,
whichever course they  took in  the end. Aragorn  let  them  drift with  the
stream as they wished, husbanding their  strength against weariness to come.
But he insisted that at least they should  start early  each day and journey
on  far into the evening; for he felt  in his heart that  time was pressing,
and he  feared that the Dark Lord  had not been idle while  they lingered in
Lurien.
Nonetheless  they saw no sign of  an enemy that  day, nor the next. The
dull grey hours passed without event. As the third  day of their voyage wore
on the lands changed slowly: the trees  thinned and  then failed altogether.
On  the eastern bank to their left  they saw long formless slopes stretching
up and away toward the sky; brown and withered they  looked, as  if fire had
passed  over them, leaving no  living  blade of green:  an  unfriendly waste
without even a broken tree or a  bold  stone to relieve the  emptiness. They
had come to  the Brown Lands  that lay, vast and  desolate, between Southern
Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed
of the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell.
Upon the west to their  right the land was treeless  also,  but it  was
flat, and  in many places green  with wide plains of grass. On this side  of
the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all
view to  the  west,  as  the  little  boats  went  rustling by  along  their
fluttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in  the light
cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through  openings  Frodo
could catch sudden  glimpses of rolling meads, and far  beyond them hills in
