Chapter 9. The Great River
Frodo  was roused  by Sam. He found  that  he was  lying, well wrapped,
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west
bank of the  Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night  away, and the grey
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire
near at hand.
They started  again  before  the day  was broad.  Not that most of  the
Company were eager to hurry southwards: they were content that the decision,
which they must make at  latest  when they came  to  Rauros and the Tindrock
Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River  bear them on at its
own  pace,  having no desire to hasten  towards  the perils that lay beyond,
whichever course they  took in  the end. Aragorn  let  them  drift with  the
stream as they wished, husbanding their  strength against weariness to come.
But he insisted that at least they should  start early  each day and journey
on  far into the evening; for he felt  in his heart that  time was pressing,
and he  feared that the Dark Lord  had not been idle while  they lingered in
Lurien.
Nonetheless  they saw no sign of  an enemy that  day, nor the next. The
dull grey hours passed without event. As the third  day of their voyage wore
on the lands changed slowly: the trees  thinned and  then failed altogether.
On  the eastern bank to their left  they saw long formless slopes stretching
up and away toward the sky; brown and withered they  looked, as  if fire had
passed  over them, leaving no  living  blade of green:  an  unfriendly waste
without even a broken tree or a  bold  stone to relieve the  emptiness. They
had come to  the Brown Lands  that lay, vast and  desolate, between Southern
Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed
of the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell.
Upon the west to their  right the land was treeless  also,  but it  was
flat, and  in many places green  with wide plains of grass. On this side  of
the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all
view to  the  west,  as  the  little  boats  went  rustling by  along  their
fluttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in  the light
cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through  openings  Frodo
could catch sudden  glimpses of rolling meads, and far  beyond them hills in
the  sunset, and  away on  the edge of sight a dark line, where marched  the
southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains.
There was no sign of living moving  things,  save birds. Of these there
were many: small  fowl whistling  and  piping in  the reeds,  but  they were
seldom seen.  Once  or  twice the  travellers  heard  the rush  and whine of
swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky.
`Swans! ' said Sam. `And mighty big ones too! '
`Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and they are black swans.'
`How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! '  said Frodo.
`I  always imagined  that as one journeyed  south it got warmer and merrier,
until winter was left behind for ever.'
'But we  have not journeyed  far south yet,'  answered Aragorn. `It  is
still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world  is cold until the
sudden spring, and we  may yet have snow again. Far away down in the Bay  of
Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or would be but
for the  Enemy. But here we are  not above sixty  leagues, I guess, south of
the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are
looking now south-west across the north  plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the
land of the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight
that runs  down from Fangorn to join  the  Great  River. That  is  the north
boundary  of Rohan; and  of old all that lay between  Limlight and the White
Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It  is a rich and pleasant land, and its
grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the River or
ride often  to its shores.  Anduin  is  wide, yet  the orcs  can shoot their
arrows  far across  the stream; and of late, it is said,  they have dared to
cross the water and raid the herds and studs of Rohan.'
Sam looked from bank to  bank  uneasily. The trees had  seemed  hostile
before, as if they harboured secret eyes and  lurking dangers; now he wished
that  the trees were still  there. He felt  that the  Company was too naked,
afloat in  little open  boats  in  the midst of shelterless  lands, and on a
river that was the frontier of war.
In  the  next day  or two, as they went on, borne  steadily southwards,
this feeling  of insecurity grew  on  all the Company. For  a whole day they
took to  their  paddles  and  hastened forward. The banks  slid by. Soon the
River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east,
and  there were  gravel-shoals  in  the water, so that  careful steering was
needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air
from  the  East. On  the  other  side the meads had  become rolling downs of
withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of
the lawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlurien. There
was little speech and  no laughter  in any of  the boats. Each member of the
Company was busy with his own thoughts.
The heart of  Legolas was running under  the stars of a summer night in
some  northern glade amid  the beech-woods; Gimli  was fingering gold in his
mind, and wondering if it were  fit to be  wrought into the  housing  of the
Lady's gift.  Merry and  Pippin in the middle  boat  were  ill at  ease, for
Boromir sat muttering  to himself, sometimes biting his nails,  as  if  some
restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes  seizing a paddle and  driving
the boat  close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat  in  the bow  looking
back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.
Sam had  long  ago  made up his mind  that,  though boats were maybe  not as
dangerous  as  he  had been  brought  up  to  believe,  they were  far  more
uncomfortable  than even  he had  imagined. He was  cramped  and  miserable,
having nothing to do but stare at the winter-lands crawling by and the  grey
water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they  did not
trust Sam with one.
As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed
heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and
longed
for camp and the feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his
sight: at first he stared  at it listlessly, then  he sat  up and rubbed his
eyes; but when he looked again he could not see it any more.
That night they camped  on a small eyot close to  the western bank. Sam
lay rolled  in  blankets  beside Frodo. `I had a funny dream an hour or  two
before we  stopped, Mr.  Frodo,' he said. `Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny
it was anyway.'
`Well,  what was it? ' said  Frodo,  knowing that  Sam would not settle
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thought
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien.'
`It wasn't funny that way, Mr. Frodo.  It was  queer.  All wrong, if it
wasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with
eyes! '
`The log's  all right,' said Frodo.  `There are  many in the River. But
leave out the eyes! '
