from  the  East. On  the  other  side the meads had  become rolling downs of
withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of
the lawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlurien. There
was little speech and  no laughter  in any of  the boats. Each member of the
Company was busy with his own thoughts.
The heart of  Legolas was running under  the stars of a summer night in
some  northern glade amid  the beech-woods; Gimli  was fingering gold in his
mind, and wondering if it were  fit to be  wrought into the  housing  of the
Lady's gift.  Merry and  Pippin in the middle  boat  were  ill at  ease, for
Boromir sat muttering  to himself, sometimes biting his nails,  as  if  some
restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes  seizing a paddle and  driving
the boat  close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat  in  the bow  looking
back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.
Sam had  long  ago  made up his mind  that,  though boats were maybe  not as
dangerous  as  he  had been  brought  up  to  believe,  they were  far  more
uncomfortable  than even  he had  imagined. He was  cramped  and  miserable,
having nothing to do but stare at the winter-lands crawling by and the  grey
water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they  did not
trust Sam with one.
As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed
heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and
longed
for camp and the feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his
sight: at first he stared  at it listlessly, then  he sat  up and rubbed his
eyes; but when he looked again he could not see it any more.
That night they camped  on a small eyot close to  the western bank. Sam
lay rolled  in  blankets  beside Frodo. `I had a funny dream an hour or  two
before we  stopped, Mr.  Frodo,' he said. `Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny
it was anyway.'
`Well,  what was it? ' said  Frodo,  knowing that  Sam would not settle
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thought
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien.'
`It wasn't funny that way, Mr. Frodo.  It was  queer.  All wrong, if it
wasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with
eyes! '
`The log's  all right,' said Frodo.  `There are  many in the River. But
leave out the eyes! '
`That I won't,'  said Sam. ` 'Twas  the eyes as made me sit  up,  so to
speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behind
Gimli's boat; but I didn't  give much heed to it. Then  it seemed as if  the
log  was slowly  catching us  up. And  that  was peculiar, as you might say,
seeing as we were all  floating on  the stream together. Just then I saw the
eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at the  near end of the
log. What's  more, it  wasn't a  log, for it had  paddle-feet, like a swan's
almost, only they seemed bigger, and kept dipping in and out of the water.
'That's when  I sat right up  and rubbed  my  eyes,  meaning  to give a
shout,  if  it was still there  when I had rubbed the drowse out of my head.
For the whatever-it-was was coming along fast now and  getting close  behind
Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether
I came to my senses, I don't know. When I looked again, it wasn't there. Yet
I  think I caught a glimpse with  the tail  of-my eye, as the saying  is, of
something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn't see no more
eyes though.
`I said to myself: "dreaming again, Sam Gamgee," I said: and  I said no
more just then. But  I've been thinking since. and now I'm not so sure. What
do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? '
'I  should make nothing of it  but a log and the dusk and sleep in your
eyes Sam, said  Frodo, if this was the  first  time that those eyes had been
seen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lurien. And
I saw  a strange creature with eyes climbing to the  flet that night. Haldir
saw it too. And do you remember the report of the  Elves that went after the
orc-band? '
`Ah,'  said  Sam. `I  do;  and  I remember  more too.  I don't  like my
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and
all, I fancy I  could put a name on the creature,  at a guess. A nasty name.
Gollum, maybe? '
`Yes, that  is what  I  have feared for some  time,' said  Frodo. `Ever
since  the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and  picked
up our trail then;  but I hoped that our stay in Lurien would throw  him off
the scent again. The miserable creature must  have  been hiding in the woods
by the Silverlode, watching us start off! '
`That's about it,'  said Sam. `And  we'd better be a  bit more watchful
ourselves,  or we'll  feel some  nasty fingers  round our necks one of these
nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And  that's what I  was leading
up to. No need to trouble  Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I
can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.'
`I might,' said Frodo, `and I might say "luggage with eyes".  You shall
watch; but only if  you promise  to  wake me  halfway  towards  morning,  if
nothing happens before then.'
In the  dead hours Frodo came out  of a  deep dark  sleep  to find  Sam
shaking him. `It's a shame to wake you,' whispered Sam, `but that's what you
said. There's  nothing  to  tell,  or not much. I thought I heard  some soft
plashing and a sniffing noise, a while  back;  but  you hear  a lot  of such
queer sounds by a river at night.'
He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets,  and fought off
his sleep. Minutes or hours passed  slowly, and  nothing happened. Frodo was
just yielding  to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly
visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes
shone coldly as  they peered inside, and then they  lifted  and gazed up  at
Frodo  on the eyot. They were not more than a yard or  two  away,  and Frodo
heard  the  soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its
sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut  off. There was
another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream  into
the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up`
'What is it? ' he whispered, springing  up and coming to Frodo. `I felt
something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? '
`Gollum,' answered Frodo. 'Or at least, so I guess.'
`Ah! '  said Aragorn. `So you know about our little footpad, do you? He
padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel. Since we  took
to boats,  he has been lying on a  log  and paddling with  hands and feet. I
have tried  to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox,
and as slippery as a  fish. I hoped the river-voyage would beat him, but  he
is too clever a waterman.
`We  shall have to  try going faster tomorrow. You lie down  now, and I
will keep watch for what is left of the night.  I wish I could  lay my hands
on the wretch.  We might make him useful. But if I cannot, we shall have  to
try  and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on
his own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.'
The night  passed without  Gollum showing  so  much as  a shadow again.
After that the Company kept a sharp look-out, but they saw no more of Gollum
