up to. No need to trouble  Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I
can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.'
`I might,' said Frodo, `and I might say "luggage with eyes".  You shall
watch; but only if  you promise  to  wake me  halfway  towards  morning,  if
nothing happens before then.'
In the  dead hours Frodo came out  of a  deep dark  sleep  to find  Sam
shaking him. `It's a shame to wake you,' whispered Sam, `but that's what you
said. There's  nothing  to  tell,  or not much. I thought I heard  some soft
plashing and a sniffing noise, a while  back;  but  you hear  a lot  of such
queer sounds by a river at night.'
He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets,  and fought off
his sleep. Minutes or hours passed  slowly, and  nothing happened. Frodo was
just yielding  to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly
visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes
shone coldly as  they peered inside, and then they  lifted  and gazed up  at
Frodo  on the eyot. They were not more than a yard or  two  away,  and Frodo
heard  the  soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its
sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut  off. There was
another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream  into
the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up`
'What is it? ' he whispered, springing  up and coming to Frodo. `I felt
something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? '
`Gollum,' answered Frodo. 'Or at least, so I guess.'
`Ah! '  said Aragorn. `So you know about our little footpad, do you? He
padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel. Since we  took
to boats,  he has been lying on a  log  and paddling with  hands and feet. I
have tried  to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox,
and as slippery as a  fish. I hoped the river-voyage would beat him, but  he
is too clever a waterman.
`We  shall have to  try going faster tomorrow. You lie down  now, and I
will keep watch for what is left of the night.  I wish I could  lay my hands
on the wretch.  We might make him useful. But if I cannot, we shall have  to
try  and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on
his own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.'
The night  passed without  Gollum showing  so  much as  a shadow again.
After that the Company kept a sharp look-out, but they saw no more of Gollum
while  the voyage lasted.  If he  was still following, he  was very wary and
cunning.  At Aragorn's bidding they paddled now  for  long  spells, and  the
banks went  swiftly  by.  But  they  saw little  of the  country,  for  they
journeyed mostly by night and  twilight, resting by day, and lying as hidden
as the  land  allowed.  In this way the  time passed without event until the
seventh day.
The weather was still grey and overcast,  with  wind from the East, but
as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faint
light,  yellow and pale green, opened under  the grey shores of cloud. There
the white rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes.
Sam looked at it and puckered his brows.
The next  day the  country on either side began to change  rapidly. The
banks began to rise and grow stony.  Soon they were passing through a  hilly
rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes
of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stood low
crumbling  cliffs, and  chimneys of  grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and
beyond  these again there  rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen  firs.
They were  drawing near to  the  grey  hill-country of  the  Emyn  Muil, the
southern march of Wilderland.
There were many birds about the cliffs and  the  rock-chimneys, and all
day high in  the  air flocks of  birds  had been circling, black against the
pale sky. As  they  lay  in their  camp that day Aragorn watched the flights
doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news
of
their voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the sun was setting,
and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a
dark  spot against the  fading light:  a  great bird high  and far  off, now
wheeling, now flying on slowly southwards.
'What is that, Legolas? ' he  asked, pointing to the northern sky.  'Is
it, as I think. an eagle? '
'Yes.' said  Legolas.  `It is an eagle, a hunting  eagle. I wonder what
that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.'
`We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn.
The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless; the
grey east wind had passed away. The thin  crescent  of the  Moon had  fallen
early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and though far away
in the South there were great ranges of cloud that still  shone faintly,  in
the West stars glinted bright.
`Come! ' said Aragorn. `We will  venture one more journey  by night. We
are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well: for I have never
journeyed by water in these parts before, not between here and the rapids of
Sarn  Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning, those are  still many  miles
ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks and
stony  eyots in the stream. We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle
swiftly.'
To Sam in  the leading  boat  was given the  task  of watchman. He  lay
forward peering into the  gloom.  The night grew dark,  but the stars  above
were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River.  It
was close  on  midnight,  and they had been drifting for  some while. hardly
using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out.  Only a few yards ahead dark
shapes loomed up in the stream and he heard the swirl of racing water. There
was  a swift  current which swung left,  towards the eastern shore where the
channel was clear. As they were swept aside  the travellers could  see,  now
very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were
thrust out  far  into the stream like a  ridge of  teeth. The boats were all
huddled together.
`Hoy  there, Aragorn! '  shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped  into  the
leader.  `This is madness! We cannot  dare the Rapids  by night! But no boat
can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.'
`Back,  back! ' cried Aragorn. 'Turn! Turn if you can!  '  He drove his
paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round.
'I am  out of my reckoning,' he said to Frodo.  'I did not know that we
had come so  far: Anduin  flows faster  than I thought.  Sarn Gebir must  be
close at hand already.'
With  great  efforts  they  checked  the boats and slowly brought  them
about; but at first they  could make only small headway against the current,
and all  the time they were  carried nearer and  nearer to the eastern bank.
Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night.
'All together,  paddle!  '  shouted  Boromir. 'Paddle! Or  we  shall be
driven on the  shoals.' Even as  he  spoke  Frodo felt the  keel beneath him
grate upon stone.
At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled
over  them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the
shoulders
