the West stars glinted bright.
`Come! ' said Aragorn. `We will  venture one more journey  by night. We
are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well: for I have never
journeyed by water in these parts before, not between here and the rapids of
Sarn  Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning, those are  still many  miles
ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks and
stony  eyots in the stream. We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle
swiftly.'
To Sam in  the leading  boat  was given the  task  of watchman. He  lay
forward peering into the  gloom.  The night grew dark,  but the stars  above
were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River.  It
was close  on  midnight,  and they had been drifting for  some while. hardly
using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out.  Only a few yards ahead dark
shapes loomed up in the stream and he heard the swirl of racing water. There
was  a swift  current which swung left,  towards the eastern shore where the
channel was clear. As they were swept aside  the travellers could  see,  now
very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were
thrust out  far  into the stream like a  ridge of  teeth. The boats were all
huddled together.
`Hoy  there, Aragorn! '  shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped  into  the
leader.  `This is madness! We cannot  dare the Rapids  by night! But no boat
can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.'
`Back,  back! ' cried Aragorn. 'Turn! Turn if you can!  '  He drove his
paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round.
'I am  out of my reckoning,' he said to Frodo.  'I did not know that we
had come so  far: Anduin  flows faster  than I thought.  Sarn Gebir must  be
close at hand already.'
With  great  efforts  they  checked  the boats and slowly brought  them
about; but at first they  could make only small headway against the current,
and all  the time they were  carried nearer and  nearer to the eastern bank.
Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night.
'All together,  paddle!  '  shouted  Boromir. 'Paddle! Or  we  shall be
driven on the  shoals.' Even as  he  spoke  Frodo felt the  keel beneath him
grate upon stone.
At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled
over  them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the
shoulders
and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell
back. foiled by his hidden  coat of mail. Another passed  through  Aragorn's
hood; and a  third  stood fast in the gunwale of  the  second boat, close by
Merry's hand. Sam thought he could glimpse black  figures running to and fro
upon the long  shingle-banks that lay under  the eastern shore.  They seemed
very near.
` Yrch! ' said Legolas, falling into his own tongue.
`Orcs! ' cried Gimli.
`Gollum's doing, I'll be bound.' said  Sam to Frodo. `And  a nice place
to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! '
They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a hand.
Every moment they expected to feel the bite  of black-feathered arrows. Many
whined overhead or struck the  water nearby; but there were no more hits. It
was dark,  but  not  too  dark  for  the  night-eyes of  Orcs,  and  in  the
star-glimmer they must have offered  their cunning foes some mark, unless it
was that  the grey cloaks Of Lurien and  the grey timber of the  elf-wrought
boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor.
Stroke by  stroke they  laboured on. In the darkness it  was hard to be
sure that they were indeed moving at  all; but slowly the swirl of the water
grew less, and the  shadow of the eastern bank faded back into the night. At
last, as far as they  could judge, they had reached the middle of the stream
again and had driven their boats back some distance above the jutting rocks.
Then  half turning they  thrust them  with all  their  strength towards  the
western shore. Under the  shadow Of bushes leaning  out  over the water they
halted and drew breath.
Legolas laid down his paddle and took  up the  bow that he had  brought
from  Lurien. Then he  sprang ashore  and climbed  a few paces up  the bank.
Stringing the bow  and  fitting an arrow  he turned, peering back  over  the
River into  the darkness.  Across  the water  there were  shrill  cries, but
nothing could be seen.
Frodo looked up at the Elf  standing tall above him, as he  gazed  into
the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned with sharp
white  stars that glittered in  the  black pools  of the sky behind. But now
rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending  out
dark outriders into the starry fields. A sudden dread fell on the Company.
` Elbereth Gilthoniel!    ' sighed Legolas as he  looked up.  Even as he did
so,  a dark shape, like a cloud and yet  not a cloud, for it moved far  more
swiftly,  came out  of the blackness in  the  South,  and  sped towards  the
Company, blotting out  all  light as it approached. Soon  it  appeared as  a
great  winged creature, blacker  than the pits in  the night. Fierce  voices
rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running
through him and clutching  at his heart;  there was  a deadly cold, like the
memory of an old wound, in his shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide.
Suddenly  the great bow of  Lurien sang. Shrill went the arrow from the
elven-string.  Frodo looked up. Almost above  him the  winged shape swerved.
There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down
into the gloom of  the eastern  shore. The sky was clean again.  There was a
tumult  of many voices far away, cursing and  wailing in  the darkness,  and
then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night.
After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt  their way
along  the water's edge for some distance, until they  found a small shallow
bay. A  few low  trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose a
steep  rocky  bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the  dawn: it
was useless  to attempt to move further by night.  They made no camp and lit
no fire, but lay huddled in the boats, moored close together.
'Praised be  the bow  of Galadriel, and the  hand and eye of Legolas! '
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of             lembas   . 'That was a mighty shot in  the
dark, my friend!'
'But who can say what it hit?' said Legolas.
'I cannot,' said Gimli. `But  I am glad that the shadow came no nearer.
I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria -- the
shadow of the Balrog,' he ended in a whisper.
'It  was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that
had come upon him.  'It was  something  colder.  I think it was  --' Then he
paused and fell silent.
'What do you think? ' asked Boromir eagerly, leaning  from his boat, as
if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face.
`I think -- No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. `Whatever it was,  its
fall has dismayed our enemies.'
`So  it seems,' said Aragorn. `Yet where they  are,  and how many,  and
what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless!
Dark hides  us now. But what the  day  will  show  who can tell?  Have  your
weapons close to hand! '
Sam  sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he  were  counting on  his
