swiftly,  came out  of the blackness in  the  South,  and  sped towards  the
Company, blotting out  all  light as it approached. Soon  it  appeared as  a
great  winged creature, blacker  than the pits in  the night. Fierce  voices
rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running
through him and clutching  at his heart;  there was  a deadly cold, like the
memory of an old wound, in his shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide.
Suddenly  the great bow of  Lurien sang. Shrill went the arrow from the
elven-string.  Frodo looked up. Almost above  him the  winged shape swerved.
There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down
into the gloom of  the eastern  shore. The sky was clean again.  There was a
tumult  of many voices far away, cursing and  wailing in  the darkness,  and
then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night.
After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt  their way
along  the water's edge for some distance, until they  found a small shallow
bay. A  few low  trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose a
steep  rocky  bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the  dawn: it
was useless  to attempt to move further by night.  They made no camp and lit
no fire, but lay huddled in the boats, moored close together.
'Praised be  the bow  of Galadriel, and the  hand and eye of Legolas! '
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of             lembas   . 'That was a mighty shot in  the
dark, my friend!'
'But who can say what it hit?' said Legolas.
'I cannot,' said Gimli. `But  I am glad that the shadow came no nearer.
I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria -- the
shadow of the Balrog,' he ended in a whisper.
'It  was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that
had come upon him.  'It was  something  colder.  I think it was  --' Then he
paused and fell silent.
'What do you think? ' asked Boromir eagerly, leaning  from his boat, as
if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face.
`I think -- No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. `Whatever it was,  its
fall has dismayed our enemies.'
`So  it seems,' said Aragorn. `Yet where they  are,  and how many,  and
what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless!
Dark hides  us now. But what the  day  will  show  who can tell?  Have  your
weapons close to hand! '
Sam  sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he  were  counting on  his
fingers, and looking up at  the sky. `It's very strange,' he  murmured. `The
Moon's the same in the Shire  and  in  Wilderland, or  it  ought  to be. But
either it's out of its running, or  I'm all  wrong  in my  reckoning. You'll
remember,  Mr. Frodo, the  Moon was waning as we lay on the  flet up in that
tree: a  week from the full,  I reckon. And we'd been a week on the way last
night, when up pops  a New Moon as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never
stayed no time in the Elvish country.
`Well, I can  remember three  nights  there for certain,  and I seem to
remember several more, but I would  take my oath it was never a whole month.
Anyone would think that time did not count in there! '
`And perhaps that was the way of it,' said Frodo. `In that land, maybe,
we  were in  a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was  not,  I  think,
until Silverlode bore us  back to Anduin that we returned  to the time  that
flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't  remember any moon,
either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day.'
Legolas stirred in his boat. `Nay, time does  not tarry ever,' he said;
`but change and growth is not in all  things and places alike. For the Elves
the world moves, and it  moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because
they  themselves change little,  and all else  fleets by:  it is a  grief to
them. Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves.
The  passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in  the long long stream.
Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.'
`But the wearing is slow in Lurien,' said Frodo. `The power of the Lady
is on it.  Rich are  the hours,  though short they  seem, in Caras Galadhon,
where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.'
'That should not have  been said  outside Lurien, not even to me,' said
Aragorn. `Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land you lost your
count.  There time  flowed swiftly by  us,  as  for the Elves. The  old moon
passed,  and  a new  moon waxed  and waned  in  the world  outside, while we
tarried there. And yestereve a new  moon came again.  Winter is nearly gone.
Time flows on to a spring of little hope.'
The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again  across the
water. The  travellers  huddled  in  their  boats  felt the  changing of the
weather. The air grew  warm and very still under the great moist clouds that
had floated up from the South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River
over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow  louder and closer. The twigs of
the trees above them began to drip.
When the day came the mood of the world about them had become soft  and
sad. Slowly  the dawn grew  to a  pale light, diffused and shadowless. There
was mist on the River, and white fog  swathed the shore; the far  bank could
not be seen.
`I can't abide fog,' said  Sam; `but this  seems to be a lucky one. Now
perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.'
`Perhaps so,'  said Aragorn. `But it  will  be  hard to find  the  path
unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the path, if we are
to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.'
'I  do  not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the  River  any
further,' said Boromir. `If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon
these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to  the
Entwash and cross into my own land.'
`We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,' said Aragorn, `but that is
not yet agreed. And such a course  may be more perilous than  it sounds. The
vale of Entwash is flat and fenny, and fog is a deadly peril there for those
on foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is
at least a path that cannot be missed.'
`But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,' objected  Boromir. `And even if
you pass the Gates  of  Argonath and come  unmolested  to the Tindrock, what
will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? '
`No! ' answered Aragorn. `Say rather that we will bear our boats by the
ancient  way to  Rauros-foot, and  there take to the water again. Do you not
know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North Stair, and the high seat
upon  Amon Hen,  that were made in the  days of the great  kings? I at least
have a mind  to stand in that high place again,  before I decide  my further
course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign that will guide us.'
Boromir held out  long  against this choice;  but  when it became plain
that Frodo  would  follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave  in. 'It is not
the  way  of the  Men of Minas Tirith to  desert their friends at  need,' he
said, `and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock.
To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There  I shall  turn to my home,
alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.'
The day  was  now  growing,  and  the fog  had lifted a  little. It was
decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the  shore,
while the  others remained  by the  boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by
which they could carry  both  their boats and their  baggage to the smoother
