fool about  with boats on that big  river  - and that  isn't  natural. Small
wonder that trouble came of  it,  I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is
as nice a young hobbit  as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo,
and in  more than  looks.  After all his  father  was  a Baggins.  A  decent
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo  Baggins; there  was never much to tell  of
him, till he was drownded.'
'Drownded?' said several  voices. They  had heard this and other darker
rumours before, of course; but  hobbits have a passion  for  family history,
and they were ready to hear  it again. 'Well, so they say,' said the Gaffer.
'You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss  Primula Brandybuck.  She  was
our
Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest
of the Old Took's  daughters); and Mr.  Drogo  was his second cousin. So Mr.
Frodo is his first    and   second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying
is,  if  you  follow me.  And Mr. Drogo was  staying at Brandy Hall with his
father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often  did after his marriage (him
being partial to  his vittles,  and old  Gorbadoc keeping  a mighty generous
table); and he went out       boating    on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. '
'I've heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,' said
Old Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.'
I
'And   heard she pushed him in, and  he pulled her in after him,'  said
Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller.
'You shouldn't listen  to all you hear, Sandyman,' said the Gaffer, who
did not much like the miller. 'There isn't no  call to go talking of pushing
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit  still without
looking  further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this  Mr. Frodo
left  an  orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might   say,  among  those  queer
Bucklanders,  being brought  up anyhow  in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than  a couple  of hundred
relations in  the place.  Mr. Bilbo  never did  a kinder  deed  than when he
brought the lad back to live among decent folk.
'But I  reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They
thought  they were going to get Bag End,  that time when he went off and was
thought to be dead.  And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes
on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly
he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers  made  out  proper.  The
Sackville-Bagginses won't never  see the inside of Bag End now, or it  is to
be hoped not.'
'There's a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,' said a
stranger,  a visitor on  business from  Michel Delving in the  Westfarthing.
'All the top of  your hill is full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and
silver,  and   jools, by what I've heard. '
'Then you've heard  more than I  can speak  to,' answered the Gaffer. I
know nothing about        jools.  Mr. Bilbo is free with  his money, and there seems
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel-making. I  saw Mr. Bilbo when he came
back, a matter of  sixty  years  ago,  when I was a  lad. I'd  not long come
prentice to old  Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag
End helping  him  to keep folks from trampling and  trapessing  all over the
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up
the Hill  with  a pony and some mighty big  bags and a couple  of  chests. I
don't  doubt  they were mostly full of treasure  he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they  say;  but there wasn't enough
to fill tunnels. But  my lad Sam will know  more about that. He's in and out
of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all
Mr. Bilbo's  tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters - meaning no harm,
mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it.
'Elves and Dragons'      I says  to him. '  Cabbages and  potatoes are  better
for me and  you. Don't go getting mixed up in  the business of your betters,
or you'll land in trouble  too big for you,'          I says  to him. And I might say
it to others,' he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did  not convince  his audience. The  legend  of Bilbo's
wealth was now too  firmly fixed in the minds  of the  younger generation of
hobbits.
'Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,'
argued the miller, voicing common  opinion. 'He's often  away from home. And
look at the outlandish  folk that visit him:  dwarves  coming at night,  and
that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf,  and  all. You can say  what you like,
Gaffer, but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer.'
'And you can say      what you    like, about what you know no more of than you
do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,' retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even
more  than usual. If  that's being queer, then we could do  with a bit  more
queerness in these parts. There's  some  not  far away that wouldn't offer a
pint of beer to a friend, if they  lived  in  a hole with golden  walls. But
they do things proper at Bag End. Our  Sam says that                  everyone's    going to be
invited to the party, and there's  going to be presents, mark you,  presents
for all - this very month as is.'
That very month  was  September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or
two  later a rumour (probably  started by the knowledgeable Sam)  was spread
about  that there were going to be fireworks - fireworks, what is more, such
as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh  on a  century, not indeed  since
the Old Took died.
Days passed  and The Day drew nearer.  An odd-looking waggon laden with
odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill
to  Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it.
It was driven  by outlandish  folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End.  At the end of the
second week in September a cart came in  through Bywater from the  direction
of the  Brandywine Bridge in  broad daylight. An old  man was driving it all
alone.  He  wore a tall pointed blue hat,  a  long grey cloak,  and a silver
scarf. He  had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows  that stuck  out beyond
the  brim of  his  hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great
bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red
G and the elf-rune, .
That was Gandalf's mark, of course,  and the  old man  was Gandalf  the
Wizard,  whose  fame in the Shire  was  due mainly to  his skill with fires,
smokes, and lights.  His real business was far more difficult and dangerous,
but  the Shire-folk knew nothing about  it. To them  he was just one  of the
'attractions'  at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. 'G
for Grand!' they  shouted, and the old man smiled.  They knew him by  sight,
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but
neither they nor  any  but  the  oldest of  their elders had seen one of his
firework displays - they now belonged to the legendary past.
When the old  man,  helped by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves,  had finished
unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or  cracker
was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.
'Run  away now!' said  Gandalf.  'You  will  get plenty  when  the time
comes.' Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door  was  shut.  The
young  hobbits  stared at  the door  in vain for a while, and then made off,
