'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The  Ring was  trying to
get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him;
then when a  chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after
that Gollum,  and it had devoured him. It could make  no further use of him:
he was too  small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never
leave his deep pool again. So  now, when its master was awake  once more and
sending out his dark  thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to
be
picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!
'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the
Ring-maker.  I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was                   meant     to
find the Ring, and      not  by its maker.  In which  case you  also were             meant   to
have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.'
It  is  not,' said Frodo. "Though I am not sure  that I understand you.
But how have you  learned all this about the Ring, and about  Gollum? Do you
really know it all, or are you just guessing still?'
Gandalf looked  at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much  and I have
learned much,' he answered. 'But I am not going to give an account of all my
doings to    you.  The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is  known
to all the  Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire-writing
alone, apart from any  other evidence.' 'And  when  did you discover  that?'
asked Frodo, interrupting. 'Just  now in this room, of course,' answered the
wizard sharply.  'But  I expected to  find  it.  I have come back  from dark
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof,  and
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the
gap in the history, required some  thought. I may have  started with guesses
about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.'
'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement.
'Yes. The obvious thing to do, of  course, if  one  could. I tried long
ago; but I have managed it at last.'
'Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?'
'Not so  clearly.  What I  have told you is what Gollum was  willing to
tell - though not, of course, in the  way  I have  reported it. Gollum  is a
liar,  and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the  Ring his
"birthday  present",  and he  stuck  to  that.  He  said it  came  from  his
grandmother, who  had lots  of beautiful  things of  that kind. A ridiculous
story. I have no doubt  that Smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch,  a great
person in her  way,  but to talk of  her  possessing  many  Elven-rings  was
absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a lie. But a lie with a grain of
truth.
'The  murder  of  Deal haunted  Gollum,  and he had made  up a defence,
repeating  it  to his "precious" over and  over again, as he gnawed bones in
the dark, until he almost  believed it. It         was    his birthday. Deal ought to
have given the ring to him. It had  previously turned up  just so as to be a
present. It   was   his birthday present, and so on, and on.
I  endured  him  as long  as  I could,  but  the truth  was desperately
important, and in the end I  had to be harsh. I put the fear of fire on him,
and wrung  the  true  story  out of  him, bit by  bit,  together  with  much
snivelling  and snarling. He thought  he was misunderstood and ill-used. But
when  he  had  at  last  told  me his history,  as  far  as  the end of  the
Riddle-game  and Bilbo's escape, he would not say any more,  except in  dark
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He muttered that he was
going  to gel his own back. People would see if he would stand being kicked,
and driven  into  a hole and  then         robbed.    Gollum had good friends now, good
friends and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That
was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What  is more, he
knew where he came from.'
'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo.
'Well, as for the  name, Bilbo very foolishly told  Gollum himself; and
after that  it  would  not be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum
came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than
his fear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After a year  or two he left the
mountains. You  see, though  still  bound  by desire of it, the Ring was  no
longer devouring him; he began  to revive a little.  He  felt  old, terribly
old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry.
'Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he always
will, I think; but he was cunning. He found he could hide  from daylight and
moonshine,  and make his way swiftly  and softly by dead of night  with  his
pale cold  eyes,  and  catch  small  frightened or  unwary  things. He  grew
stronger  and  bolder  with new food  and  new air. He  found  his way  into
Mirkwood, as one would expect.'
'Is that where you found him?' asked Frodo.
'I  saw  him there,' answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered
far, following  Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to  learn anything  from him
for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted  by curses and threats.
"What had it  got in its pocketses?" he said. "It wouldn't say, no precious.
Little cheat. Not a fair  question. It  cheated first, it did. It  broke the
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!"
'That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had
weary days  of it. But from hints dropped among  the snarls I  even gathered
that his padding feet had  taken him  at last to Esgaroth, and even  to  the
streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great
events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name  and
knew where he came from.  We had made no secret of our return journey to his
home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.'
'Then why didn't  he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't  he
come to the Shire?'
'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set
out and  came  back westward, as far as the Great River. But  then he turned
aside. He  was not daunted by  the distance, I am  sure.  No, something else
drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me.
'The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail
was  still fresh  then. Through Mirkwood and back again it  led them, though
they never  caught him. The wood was full of  the  rumour  of  him, dreadful
tales even among beasts and birds. The  Woodmen said that there was some
new
terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to  find nests; it
crept into  holes  to  find  the young; it slipped  through windows  to find
cradles.
'But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wandered
off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then
I made a great mistake. Yes,  Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may
prove the  worst. I let the matter be. I let  him go; for I had much else to
think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman.
'Well, that was  years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark and
dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo
left here. And my search would  have been in vain,  but for the  help that I
had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this  age
of  the world.  Together we  sought  for  Gollum down  the  whole length  of
Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given
up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned
