When the day came the mood of the world about them had become soft  and
sad. Slowly  the dawn grew  to a  pale light, diffused and shadowless. There
was mist on the River, and white fog  swathed the shore; the far  bank could
not be seen.
`I can't abide fog,' said  Sam; `but this  seems to be a lucky one. Now
perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.'
`Perhaps so,'  said Aragorn. `But it  will  be  hard to find  the  path
unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the path, if we are
to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.'
'I  do  not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the  River  any
further,' said Boromir. `If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon
these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to  the
Entwash and cross into my own land.'
`We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,' said Aragorn, `but that is
not yet agreed. And such a course  may be more perilous than  it sounds. The
vale of Entwash is flat and fenny, and fog is a deadly peril there for those
on foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is
at least a path that cannot be missed.'
`But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,' objected  Boromir. `And even if
you pass the Gates  of  Argonath and come  unmolested  to the Tindrock, what
will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? '
`No! ' answered Aragorn. `Say rather that we will bear our boats by the
ancient  way to  Rauros-foot, and  there take to the water again. Do you not
know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North Stair, and the high seat
upon  Amon Hen,  that were made in the  days of the great  kings? I at least
have a mind  to stand in that high place again,  before I decide  my further
course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign that will guide us.'
Boromir held out  long  against this choice;  but  when it became plain
that Frodo  would  follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave  in. 'It is not
the  way  of the  Men of Minas Tirith to  desert their friends at  need,' he
said, `and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock.
To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There  I shall  turn to my home,
alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.'
The day  was  now  growing,  and  the fog  had lifted a  little. It was
decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the  shore,
while the  others remained  by the  boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by
which they could carry  both  their boats and their  baggage to the smoother
water beyond the Rapids.
`Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,' he said, `but that does not
say that  we should come through Sarn  Gebir  alive.  None have ever done so
yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their
great  days  their realm did not reach up  Anduin beyond the Emyn  Muil; but
there is a portage-way somewhere on  the western shore, if I can find it. It
cannot yet have perished; for light boats used to journey  out of Wilderland
down to Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs  of
Mordor began to multiply.'
'Seldom in my life has any boat come  out of  the North,  and  the Orcs
prowl on the east-shore,' said Boromir. `If you go forward, peril  will grow
with every mile, even if you find a path.'
`Peril lies ahead on every southward road,' answered Aragorn. `Wait for
us one day.  If we do  not return in that time, you will know that  evil has
indeed befallen us. Then you must take a new leader  and follow him as  best
you can.'
It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb  the
steep bank and vanish into the  mists; but his fears proved groundless. Only
two or three hours had passed, and it  was barely mid-day, when  the shadowy
shapes of the explorers appeared again.
`All is well,' said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. 'There is a
track,  and  it leads  to  a good landing  that  is still  serviceable.  The
distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half  a mile below  us,
and  they  are little more than a mile long.  Not far beyond them the stream
becomes clear  and  smooth again,  though it runs  swiftly. Our hardest task
will be to get our boats and baggage  to the old  portage-way. We have found
it, but it lies well  back from  the water-side here, and runs under the lee
of  a rock-wall, a furlong or more from the shore. We did not find where the
northward  landing  lies. If it  still  remains,  we  must  have  passed  it
yesterday night. We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the  fog. I
fear we must leave the River now, and make  for the  portage-way  as best we
can from here.'
`That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,' said Boromir.
`Yet such as we are we will try it,' said Aragorn.
'Aye, we  will,' said Gimli. `The legs of Men will lag on a rough road,
while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! '
The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The goods were
taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was a
level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They
were  far less heavy than any  had  expected.  Of what  tree growing in  the
elvish country  they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was
tough
and yet strangely light. Merry and Pippin alone could  carry their boat with
ease  along the  flat. Nonetheless it  needed the strength of the two Men to
lift  and haul them  over the ground that the  Company  now had to cross. It
sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of  grey  limestone-boulders,
with many hidden holes  shrouded with weeds and bushes;  there were thickets
of brambles,  and sheer dells;  and here and there boggy pools fed by waters
trickling from the terraces further inland.
One  by  one  Boromir and  Aragorn  carried the boats, while the others
toiled  and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last  all was  removed
and laid  on the  portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from
sprawling briars and many fallen  stones, they  moved forward all  together.
Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling rock-wall, and to their left mist
shrouded the River: they  could hear it  rushing  and foaming over the sharp
shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they
made the journey, before all was brought safe to the southern landing.
There the portage-way, turning back  to the water-side, ran gently down
to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been  scooped in the
river-side, not by hand,  but by the  water  swirling  down  from Sarn Gebir
against a low pier of  rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond
it the shore rose sheer into a grey  cliff, and there was no further passage
for those on foot.
Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was closing
in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of the
Rapids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleepy, and their hearts were
as gloomy as the dying day.
'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,' said Boromir.
`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath
by night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.'
Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat.
`Let us rest as much  as  we can now,' said  Aragorn. `Tomorrow we must
journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, we
shall have  a good chance  of slipping through, unseen  by any eyes  on  the
