taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was a
level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They
were  far less heavy than any  had  expected.  Of what  tree growing in  the
elvish country  they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was
tough
and yet strangely light. Merry and Pippin alone could  carry their boat with
ease  along the  flat. Nonetheless it  needed the strength of the two Men to
lift  and haul them  over the ground that the  Company  now had to cross. It
sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of  grey  limestone-boulders,
with many hidden holes  shrouded with weeds and bushes;  there were thickets
of brambles,  and sheer dells;  and here and there boggy pools fed by waters
trickling from the terraces further inland.
One  by  one  Boromir and  Aragorn  carried the boats, while the others
toiled  and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last  all was  removed
and laid  on the  portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from
sprawling briars and many fallen  stones, they  moved forward all  together.
Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling rock-wall, and to their left mist
shrouded the River: they  could hear it  rushing  and foaming over the sharp
shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they
made the journey, before all was brought safe to the southern landing.
There the portage-way, turning back  to the water-side, ran gently down
to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been  scooped in the
river-side, not by hand,  but by the  water  swirling  down  from Sarn Gebir
against a low pier of  rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond
it the shore rose sheer into a grey  cliff, and there was no further passage
for those on foot.
Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was closing
in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of the
Rapids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleepy, and their hearts were
as gloomy as the dying day.
'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,' said Boromir.
`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath
by night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.'
Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat.
`Let us rest as much  as  we can now,' said  Aragorn. `Tomorrow we must
journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, we
shall have  a good chance  of slipping through, unseen  by any eyes  on  the
eastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns: three hours off
and one on guard.'
Nothing happened that night  worse than a brief drizzle of rain an hour
before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already the fog was
thinning. They kept as  close as they could  to  the western  side, and they
could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls
with  their  feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the  clouds drew
down  lower,  and it began to rain heavily. They drew  the  skin-covers over
their boats to prevent them from being flooded, and drifted on: little could
be seen before them or about them through the grey falling curtains.
The rain,  however, did  not  last  long.  Slowly  the  sky above  grew
lighter,  and  then  suddenly the clouds broke,  and  their draggled fringes
trailed away northward up the  River. The  fogs and mists were  gone. Before
the travellers  lay  a wide ravine, with  great rocky sides to which  clung,
upon  shelves  and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn  trees. The channel grew
narrower and the River swifter. Now  they were speeding  along  with  little
hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might meet ahead. Over them was a
lane of pale-blue sky, around them  the dark overshadowed  River, and before
them  black, shutting out  the  sun,  the hills of  Emyn Muil, in  which  no
opening could be seen.
Frodo peering  forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching:
like  great pinnacles or pillars  of stone  they seemed.  Tall and sheer and
ominous they stood upon either  side of the  stream. A  narrow  gap appeared
between them, and the River swept the boats towards it.
`Behold the Argonath, the Pillars  of  the Kings! ' cried  Aragorn. `We
shall pass them soon. Keep the boats  in  line, and as far apart as you can!
Hold the middle of the stream! '
As Frodo was  borne towards them the great  pillars rose like towers to
meet  him.  Giants  they  seemed  to  him,  vast  grey  figures  silent  but
threatening. Then  he saw that they were  indeed shaped and  fashioned:  the
craft and power  of  old had  wrought  upon them,  and  still they preserved
through the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which
they  had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded  in the deep  waters stood
two great kings  of stone: still with blurred eyes and  crannied  brows they
frowned upon  the North. The left hand of each  was raised  palm outwards in
gesture of  warning;  in each  right  hand there  was an axe; upon each head
there  was a crumbling helm  and crown. Great  power and majesty they  still
wore, the silent wardens  of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon
Frodo,  and he  cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as
the boat drew  near. Even Boromir bowed  his head  as  the boats whirled by.
frail and  fleeting  as little  leaves,  under  the  enduring  shadow of the
sentinels of N®menor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Far
off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed
over them.  Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front  muttering and
groaning: `What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of  this
boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! '
`Fear  not! ' said a  strange voice behind him.  Frodo  turned and  saw
Strider, and  yet  not Strider; for  the  weatherworn Ranger  was  no longer
there.  In the  stern  sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding
the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was
blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to
his own land.
'Fear not!  ' he said. `Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses
of  Isildur and Anbrion, my sires of old.  Under  their shadow  Elessar, the
Elfstone son of  Arathorn of the House  of  Valandil  Isildur's  son heir of
Elendil, has nought to dread! '
Then the light of  his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: `Would that
Gandalf were  here! How my  heart yearns  for Minas Anor and the walls of my
own city! But whither now shall I go? '
The  chasm was long and  dark,  and filled  with the noise of wind  and
rushing water and echoing stone. It  bent somewhat  towards the west so that
at first all was dark  ahead; but soon Frodo  saw a tall gap of light before
him,  ever  growing.  Swiftly it  drew  near,  and  suddenly the  boats shot
through, out into a wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy sky.
The pent  waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale  Nen Hithoel, fenced
by  steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees, but  their heads were
bare,  cold-gleaming in  the sunlight. At  the far  southern end  rose three
peaks.  The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered
from
them, an island  in the waters,  about  which  the flowing River  flung pale
shimmering arms. Distant but deep there came up on the wind a  roaring sound
like the roll of thunder heard far away.
