wore, the silent wardens  of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon
Frodo,  and he  cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as
the boat drew  near. Even Boromir bowed  his head  as  the boats whirled by.
frail and  fleeting  as little  leaves,  under  the  enduring  shadow of the
sentinels of N®menor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Far
off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed
over them.  Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front  muttering and
groaning: `What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of  this
boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! '
`Fear  not! ' said a  strange voice behind him.  Frodo  turned and  saw
Strider, and  yet  not Strider; for  the  weatherworn Ranger  was  no longer
there.  In the  stern  sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding
the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was
blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to
his own land.
'Fear not!  ' he said. `Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses
of  Isildur and Anbrion, my sires of old.  Under  their shadow  Elessar, the
Elfstone son of  Arathorn of the House  of  Valandil  Isildur's  son heir of
Elendil, has nought to dread! '
Then the light of  his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: `Would that
Gandalf were  here! How my  heart yearns  for Minas Anor and the walls of my
own city! But whither now shall I go? '
The  chasm was long and  dark,  and filled  with the noise of wind  and
rushing water and echoing stone. It  bent somewhat  towards the west so that
at first all was dark  ahead; but soon Frodo  saw a tall gap of light before
him,  ever  growing.  Swiftly it  drew  near,  and  suddenly the  boats shot
through, out into a wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy sky.
The pent  waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale  Nen Hithoel, fenced
by  steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees, but  their heads were
bare,  cold-gleaming in  the sunlight. At  the far  southern end  rose three
peaks.  The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered
from
them, an island  in the waters,  about  which  the flowing River  flung pale
shimmering arms. Distant but deep there came up on the wind a  roaring sound
like the roll of thunder heard far away.
`Behold Tol Brandir! ' said Aragorn,  pointing south to  the tall peak.
'Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen the Hills of
Hearing and of Sight. In the days  of the  great kings there were high seats
upon  them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of  man or
beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere  the shade of  night  falls we
shall come to them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.'
The Company rested now for a while,  drifting south on the current that
flowed through the middle  of  the lake. They  ate  some food, and then they
took  to their paddles and  hastened on their way. The sides of the westward
hills fell into shadow, and  the Sun  grew round and  red.  Here and there a
misty  star peered out. The three peaks loomed before  them, darkling in the
twilight. Rauros was roaring with a great voice.  Already  night was laid on
the flowing waters when the travellers came at  last under the shadow of the
hills.
The tenth  day of their journey  was over.  Wilderland was behind them.
They could go no further without choice between the  east-way and  the west.
The last stage of the Quest was before them.
Chapter 10. The Breaking of the Fellowship
Aragorn led them to  the right  arm of the River. Here upon its western
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from
the feet of Amon Hen.  Behind it rose the first gentle  slopes  of  the hill
clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of
the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass.
'Here  we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn. `This is the lawn  of Parth
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope  that no evil has
yet come here.'
They drew up their boats on the green banks, and  beside them they made
their camp.  They set  a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies.
If Gollum had contrived  to follow  them,  he  remained  unseen and unheard.
Nonetheless as the night  wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in  his
sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn
it was to watch.
`Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. `It is not your watch.'
`I do  not know,' answered Aragorn; `but a shadow and a threat has been
growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.'
`Why? ' said Frodo. `Are enemies at hand? '
`Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn.
Frodo  then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges
gleamed  dimly in  the night. `Orcs! ' he said. `Not very  near, and yet too
near, it seems.'
`I feared as much,' said Aragorn. `But maybe they are  not on this side
of the River. The light of  Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than
spies of Mordor  roaming on the  slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.  I have never heard
before of Orcs  upon Amon Hen. Yet who  knows what may happen in  these
evil
days, now  that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of  Anduin.
We must go warily tomorrow.'
The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars
of cloud  like the fumes of a great burning. The  rising  sun  lit them from
beneath  with flames of  murky red; but  soon  it climbed above  them into a
clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with  gold. Frodo looked out
