Chapter 10. The Breaking of the Fellowship
Aragorn led them to  the right  arm of the River. Here upon its western
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from
the feet of Amon Hen.  Behind it rose the first gentle  slopes  of  the hill
clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of
the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass.
'Here  we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn. `This is the lawn  of Parth
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope  that no evil has
yet come here.'
They drew up their boats on the green banks, and  beside them they made
their camp.  They set  a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies.
If Gollum had contrived  to follow  them,  he  remained  unseen and unheard.
Nonetheless as the night  wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in  his
sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn
it was to watch.
`Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. `It is not your watch.'
`I do  not know,' answered Aragorn; `but a shadow and a threat has been
growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.'
`Why? ' said Frodo. `Are enemies at hand? '
`Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn.
Frodo  then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges
gleamed  dimly in  the night. `Orcs! ' he said. `Not very  near, and yet too
near, it seems.'
`I feared as much,' said Aragorn. `But maybe they are  not on this side
of the River. The light of  Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than
spies of Mordor  roaming on the  slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.  I have never heard
before of Orcs  upon Amon Hen. Yet who  knows what may happen in  these
evil
days, now  that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of  Anduin.
We must go warily tomorrow.'
The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars
of cloud  like the fumes of a great burning. The  rising  sun  lit them from
beneath  with flames of  murky red; but  soon  it climbed above  them into a
clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with  gold. Frodo looked out
eastward and  gazed at the tall island.  Its  sides  sprang sheer out of the
running  water. High up above the  tall cliffs were  steep slopes upon which
trees climbed, mounting  one  head above another; and  above them again were
grey  faces of inaccessible rock, crowned by  a great spire  of  stone. Many
birds were  circling  about it, but no sign of  other living things could be
seen.
When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. `The  day has
come at last,' he said: 'the day of choice which we have  long delayed. What
shall  now become  of our Company that has  travelled  so far in fellowship?
Shall we turn  west with  Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; or turn east
to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and
that as each may choose? Whatever  we do must  be done soon. We  cannot
long
halt here. The  enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I  fear that the
Orcs may already be on this side of the water.'
There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved.
'Well,  Frodo,'  said Aragorn at last. `I fear that  the burden is laid
upon  you. You are the  Bearer  appointed by the  Council. Your  own way you
alone  can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and
though I have tried to  bear his part, I do not know what design or hope  he
had  for this hour,  if indeed he had any. Most  likely it seems that if  he
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.'
Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. `I  know that haste
is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer,
and I will speak. Let me be alone! '
Aragorn looked  at  him with  kindly  pity. `Very  well,  Frodo  son of
Drogo,' he  said. `You shall have an hour, and  you  shall be alone. We will
stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.'
Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had  been watching
his master with  great  concern, shook his  head and  muttered:  'Plain as a
pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.'
,
Presently Frodo  got  up and  walked away;  and Sam saw that  while the
others restrained  themselves and did not stare at him,  the eyes of Boromir
followed Frodo  intently, until he passed  out of sight in the  trees at the
foot of Amon Hen.
Wandering  aimlessly at first in the  wood, Frodo found  that his  feet
were leading  him up towards the  slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the
dwindling ruins of a  road of long  ago. In steep places stairs of stone had
been hewn,  but now they were  cracked  and worn, and split by the  roots of
trees.  For some while he climbed, not caring which  way  he  went, until he
came  to a  grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and  in the midst was a
wide  flat stone.  The  little upland lawn  was  open upon the  East and was
filled now with  the early  sunlight. Frodo halted  and looked  out over the
River, far  below  him, to Tol  Brandir and the birds wheeling in the  great
gulf of air between  him and the untrodden isle.  The voice of Rauros was  a
mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom.
He  sat  down upon the stone  and cupped his chin in his hands, staring
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo
left the Shire was passing through his mind,  and he  recalled and  pondered
everything  that he could  remember  of Gandalf's words.  Time went on,  and
still he was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to him that
something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon  him. He sprang  up
and turned; but all that  he saw to his  surprise was Boromir, and his  face
was smiling and kind.
`I was afraid for  you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. `If Aragorn is
right and Orcs are near,  then none of us should wander alone, and you least
of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too  is heavy. May  I  stay now
and talk for a  while,  since  I have found  you? It would comfort me. Where
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together
may perhaps find wisdom.'
`You are kind,'  answered Frodo. 'But  I do not think  that  any speech
will help me.  For  I know what I should do, but I  am  afraid of doing  it,
Boromir: afraid.'
Boromir stood  silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in
the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. `Are you sure that you do not
suffer needlessly? ' he said. `I wish to help you. You need counsel in  your
hard choice. Will you not take mine? '
'I  think I know already  what counsel you would  give, Boromir,'  said
Frodo. 'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.'
`Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply.
'Against  delay. Against the  way that seems easier. Against refusal of
