were leading  him up towards the  slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the
dwindling ruins of a  road of long  ago. In steep places stairs of stone had
been hewn,  but now they were  cracked  and worn, and split by the  roots of
trees.  For some while he climbed, not caring which  way  he  went, until he
came  to a  grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and  in the midst was a
wide  flat stone.  The  little upland lawn  was  open upon the  East and was
filled now with  the early  sunlight. Frodo halted  and looked  out over the
River, far  below  him, to Tol  Brandir and the birds wheeling in the  great
gulf of air between  him and the untrodden isle.  The voice of Rauros was  a
mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom.
He  sat  down upon the stone  and cupped his chin in his hands, staring
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo
left the Shire was passing through his mind,  and he  recalled and  pondered
everything  that he could  remember  of Gandalf's words.  Time went on,  and
still he was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to him that
something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon  him. He sprang  up
and turned; but all that  he saw to his  surprise was Boromir, and his  face
was smiling and kind.
`I was afraid for  you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. `If Aragorn is
right and Orcs are near,  then none of us should wander alone, and you least
of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too  is heavy. May  I  stay now
and talk for a  while,  since  I have found  you? It would comfort me. Where
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together
may perhaps find wisdom.'
`You are kind,'  answered Frodo. 'But  I do not think  that  any speech
will help me.  For  I know what I should do, but I  am  afraid of doing  it,
Boromir: afraid.'
Boromir stood  silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in
the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. `Are you sure that you do not
suffer needlessly? ' he said. `I wish to help you. You need counsel in  your
hard choice. Will you not take mine? '
'I  think I know already  what counsel you would  give, Boromir,'  said
Frodo. 'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.'
`Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply.
'Against  delay. Against the  way that seems easier. Against refusal of
the  burden  that  is laid on me. Against-well,  if it must be said, against
trust in the strength and truth of Men.'
`Yet that  strength has  long  protected you far  away  in  your little
country, though you knew it not.'
'I do not doubt the valour of  your  people. But the world is changing.
The  walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong enough. If
they fail, what then? '
'We shall fall in battle valiantly.  Yet there is still hope  that they
will not fail.'
'No hope while the Ring lasts,' said Frodo.
'Ah! The Ring! '  said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not
a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt  for so  small a
thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House
of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? '
Frodo looked  up. His heart went suddenly cold.  He caught the  strange
gleam in  Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind  and friendly.  'It is
best that it should lie hidden,' he answered.
'As you wish. I care  not,' said Boromir.  'Yet may I not even speak of
it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands  of the Enemy:
of  its evil  uses not  of its good.  The  world is changing, you say. Minas
Tirith will fall,  if the Ring lasts. But why?  Certainly, if the  Ring were
with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? '
'Were you not at the Council?  ' answered Frodo. `Because we cannot use
it, and what is done with it turns to evil.'
Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go  on,' he cried.
'Gandalf, Elrond -- all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves
they may be right. These  elves and half-elves and  wizards, they would come
to grief perhaps.  Yet often I  doubt if they are wise and not merely timid.
But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they  will  not be corrupted. We
of Minas Tirith have been  staunch  through long years  of trial. We do  not
desire  the  power  of  wizard-lords,  only  strength  to  defend ourselves,
strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the
-Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad
not to use it, to  use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the
ruthless, these alone will  achieve victory.  What could not a warrior do in
this  hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why
not Boromir? The Ring would give  me power of Command. How I would
drive the
hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!'
Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed
to have forgotten Frodo, while  his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the
mustering  of  men;  and he drew  plans  for  great alliances  and  glorious
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself  a mighty king,
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.
'And  they tell  us to throw it away!' he cried. `I do not say             destroy
it. That might be  well, if  reason could show any hope of doing so. It does
not. The only  plan that  is proposed  to us  is that a halfling should walk
blindly into  Mordor and offer  the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for
himself. Folly!
'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning  now suddenly to Frodo
again. `You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should  pardon
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?'
'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo.  'Simply  afraid. But I am glad  to have
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.'
`Then  you  will come to  Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir.  His eyes were
shining and his face eager.
`You misunderstand me,' said Frodo.
'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city
is not far  now;  and it is little further  from  there to  Mordor than from
here.  We have  been long in the  wilderness, and you need  news of what the
Enemy is doing  before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he  said.
`You
need  rest before your venture. if  go you must.' He laid  his  hand on  the
hobbit's  shoulder in friendly fashion;  but Frodo  felt  the hand trembling
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the
tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength.
`Why are you  so unfriendly? '  said Boromir. `I am a true man, neither
thief nor tracker. I  need your Ring: that you know now; but  I give  you my
word  that I do not  desire to keep it.  Will you not at least  let me  make
trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! '
`No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.'
`It is by our own folly that the Enemy will  defeat us,' cried Boromir.
`How it  angers  me!  Fool!  Obstinate fool!  Running wilfully to  death and
