not Boromir? The Ring would give  me power of Command. How I would
drive the
hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!'
Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed
to have forgotten Frodo, while  his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the
mustering  of  men;  and he drew  plans  for  great alliances  and  glorious
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself  a mighty king,
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.
'And  they tell  us to throw it away!' he cried. `I do not say             destroy
it. That might be  well, if  reason could show any hope of doing so. It does
not. The only  plan that  is proposed  to us  is that a halfling should walk
blindly into  Mordor and offer  the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for
himself. Folly!
'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning  now suddenly to Frodo
again. `You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should  pardon
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?'
'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo.  'Simply  afraid. But I am glad  to have
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.'
`Then  you  will come to  Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir.  His eyes were
shining and his face eager.
`You misunderstand me,' said Frodo.
'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city
is not far  now;  and it is little further  from  there to  Mordor than from
here.  We have  been long in the  wilderness, and you need  news of what the
Enemy is doing  before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he  said.
`You
need  rest before your venture. if  go you must.' He laid  his  hand on  the
hobbit's  shoulder in friendly fashion;  but Frodo  felt  the hand trembling
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the
tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength.
`Why are you  so unfriendly? '  said Boromir. `I am a true man, neither
thief nor tracker. I  need your Ring: that you know now; but  I give  you my
word  that I do not  desire to keep it.  Will you not at least  let me  make
trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! '
`No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.'
`It is by our own folly that the Enemy will  defeat us,' cried Boromir.
`How it  angers  me!  Fool!  Obstinate fool!  Running wilfully to  death and
ruining our cause.  If any mortals have claim  to the Ring, it is the men of
N®menor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might
have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me! '
Frodo  did not answer, but moved away  till the great  flat stone stood
between them. `Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your  doubt and  fear? You can lay the
blame on me, if you will.  You  can say that I was too strong and took it by
force. For I am  too strong for you, halfling,' he cried;  and  suddenly  he
sprang  over the stone  and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face  was
hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes.
Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was only
one thing he could do: trembling  he pulled  out the Ring upon its chain and
quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him  again.  The
Man  gasped, stared for a  moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking
here and there among the rocks and trees.
'Miserable trickster!' he shouted. `Let me  get my  hands on you! Now I
see your mind. You  will take the Ring  to Sauron and  sell us all. You have
only waited  your  chance to  leave  us  in  the  lurch. Curse  you and  all
halflings to death  and darkness! ' Then, catching his foot on  a stone,  he
fell sprawling and  lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his
own curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept.
He rose and  passed  his  hand  over his eyes, dashing away  the tears.
'What have I said? ' he cried. `What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called.
'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! '
There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was  already
far  away, leaping  blindly up  the path to the hill-top. Terror  and  grief
shook  him, seeing in  his thought the  mad fierce face of Boromir,  and his
burning eyes.
Soon  he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,  gasping
for breath. He saw as through a mist a  wide  flat circle, paved with mighty
flags, and surrounded with  a crumbling battlement;  and in the middle,  set
upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps.
Up  he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like  a lost  child that
had clambered upon the throne of mountain-kings.
At first he could see little. He seemed  to be in a  world of  mist  in
which  there were only shadows: the Ring  was upon him.  Then here and there
the mist gave way and he saw  many visions: small and clear as if they  were
under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright
living images.  The world  seemed to have shrunk  and  fallen silent. He was
sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men
of  N®menor. Eastward he looked into  wide uncharted lands, nameless plains,
and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great  River lay like a
ribbon beneath him, and the  Misty Mountains stood small and hard  as broken
teeth. Westward he looked and saw  the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc,
the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below
his very feet the  Great River curled  like a toppling wave and plunged over
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the
fume. And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of
sea-birds whirling like a white dust  in the  sun, and  beneath them a green
and silver sea, rippling in endless lines.
But everywhere he looked he saw  the signs of  war. The Misty Mountains
were  crawling  like anthills:  orcs were  issuing out  of a thousand holes.
Under the  boughs of  Mirkwood there was  deadly strife of Elves and Men and
fell  beasts. The  land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria;
smoke rose on the borders of Lurien.
Horsemen  were  galloping on  the grass of  Rohan;  wolves poured  from
Isengard. From the  havens of Harad ships of war  put out to sea; and out of
the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon
horses,
chariots of chieftains  and laden wains. All  the power of the Dark Lord was
in  motion. Then turning south  again  he  beheld Minas Tirith. Far away  it
seemed. and beautiful: white-walled,  many-towered, proud  and fair upon its
mountain-seat;  its battlements  glittered with  steel, and its turrets were
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith
was  set  another  fortress,  greater and more  strong.  Thither,  eastward,
unwilling his eye was drawn.  It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the
grinning  gates of  Minas Morgul. and the  haunted Mountains, and it  looked
upon Gorgoroth, the  valley of terror  in the  Land  of Mordor. Darkness lay
there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning,
and
a  great  reek  rising.  Then at last  his  gaze was held: wall  upon  wall,
battlement  upon  battlement, black, immeasurably strong,  mountain of iron,
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw  it: Barad-dyr,  Fortress of Sauron.
All hope left him.
