under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright
living images.  The world  seemed to have shrunk  and  fallen silent. He was
sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men
of  N®menor. Eastward he looked into  wide uncharted lands, nameless plains,
and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great  River lay like a
ribbon beneath him, and the  Misty Mountains stood small and hard  as broken
teeth. Westward he looked and saw  the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc,
the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below
his very feet the  Great River curled  like a toppling wave and plunged over
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the
fume. And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of
sea-birds whirling like a white dust  in the  sun, and  beneath them a green
and silver sea, rippling in endless lines.
But everywhere he looked he saw  the signs of  war. The Misty Mountains
were  crawling  like anthills:  orcs were  issuing out  of a thousand holes.
Under the  boughs of  Mirkwood there was  deadly strife of Elves and Men and
fell  beasts. The  land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria;
smoke rose on the borders of Lurien.
Horsemen  were  galloping on  the grass of  Rohan;  wolves poured  from
Isengard. From the  havens of Harad ships of war  put out to sea; and out of
the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon
horses,
chariots of chieftains  and laden wains. All  the power of the Dark Lord was
in  motion. Then turning south  again  he  beheld Minas Tirith. Far away  it
seemed. and beautiful: white-walled,  many-towered, proud  and fair upon its
mountain-seat;  its battlements  glittered with  steel, and its turrets were
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith
was  set  another  fortress,  greater and more  strong.  Thither,  eastward,
unwilling his eye was drawn.  It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the
grinning  gates of  Minas Morgul. and the  haunted Mountains, and it  looked
upon Gorgoroth, the  valley of terror  in the  Land  of Mordor. Darkness lay
there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning,
and
a  great  reek  rising.  Then at last  his  gaze was held: wall  upon  wall,
battlement  upon  battlement, black, immeasurably strong,  mountain of iron,
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw  it: Barad-dyr,  Fortress of Sauron.
All hope left him.
And suddenly he felt the  Eye. There was an eye  in the Dark Tower that
did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze.  A fierce eager
will  was there.  It leaped  towards him; almost  like a finger he  felt it,
searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where
he was. Amon  Lhaw it touched. It glanced  upon Tol Brandir he threw himself
from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood.
He heard himself crying out:         Never, never!     Or was it:   Verily I  come, I
come to  you    ? He could not tell. Then  as a flash  from some other point  of
power there  came  to  his mind another thought:               Take it off!  Take  it off!
Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring!
The two powers strove in him. For a moment,  perfectly balanced between
their piercing  points,  he  writhed,  tormented. Suddenly  he was aware  of
himself  again. Frodo, neither  the  Voice nor the Eye: free to choose,  and
with  one  remaining  instant in  which to  do so. He  took the Ring off his
finger. He  was kneeling in clear  sunlight before  the  high  seat. A black
shadow seemed to  pass like an arm above him; it  missed Amon Hen and
groped
out west,  and faded. Then all the sky was  clean and blue and birds sang in
every tree.
Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him,  but his will was
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. `I will do now what I
must,' he said.  'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at
work even in the Company,  and the Ring must leave them before it  does more
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot  trust, and  those I  can trust are too
dear  to me: poor old  Sam,  and Merry and  Pippin. Strider,  too: his heart
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen
into evil. I will go alone. At once.'
He went quickly  down the path and came back to the lawn where  Boromir
had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he could hear cries and
calls from the woods near the shore below.
'They'll be hunting  for  me,' he  said. `I wonder how long I have been
away. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can  I  do? ' he muttered.
'I must go now or I shall never go.  I shan't  get  a  chance  again. I hate
leaving them, and like  this without  any explanation. But surely  they will
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?'
Slowly he  drew out the Ring and put it  on  once more. He vanished and
passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind.
The others remained long by the river-side. For some time they had been
silent, moving restlessly about; but now they  were sitting in a circle, and
they  were talking. Every now  and again they made efforts to speak of other
things,  of  their  long road and many  adventures;  they questioned Aragorn
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient  history, and the remnants of
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border-land  of the
Emyn  Muil: the stone kings and  the  seats of Lhaw and Hen, and  the  great
Stair  beside  the falls  of  Rauros. But always  their  thoughts  and words
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose  to do? Why
was
he hesitating?
`He is  debating  which course  is  the most desperate, I think,'  said
Aragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company
to  go east, since we have  been tracked by Gollum,  and  must fear that the
secret of our journey is already betrayed.  But Minas Tirith is no nearer to
the Fire and the destruction of the Burden.
`We may remain there for a while  and make  a brave stand; but the Lord
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond  said was beyond
his power: either to keep the Burden  secret. or to hold  off the full might
of the Enemy when he comes  to take it.  Which way would any of us choose in
Frodo's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.'
'Grievous is our loss,'  said Legolas.  'Yet we must needs make up  our
minds without his aid.  Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.'
`And so should I,'  said Gimli. 'We, of course, were only sent  to help
the  Bearer along the  road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us
is under any oath or  command to  seek Mount Doom.  Hard was my parting
from
Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we  have reached the
last  choice, it  is clear to  me that I  cannot leave Frodo. I would choose
Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.'
`And I  too will go with him,' said Legolas. `It would be faithless now
to say farewell.'
'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn. 'But
if  he goes east,  then all need not go  with him; nor  do I think that  all
should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two,
or  one alone.  If  you  would let me choose,  then  I should  appoint three
