The others remained long by the river-side. For some time they had been
silent, moving restlessly about; but now they  were sitting in a circle, and
they  were talking. Every now  and again they made efforts to speak of other
things,  of  their  long road and many  adventures;  they questioned Aragorn
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient  history, and the remnants of
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border-land  of the
Emyn  Muil: the stone kings and  the  seats of Lhaw and Hen, and  the  great
Stair  beside  the falls  of  Rauros. But always  their  thoughts  and words
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose  to do? Why
was
he hesitating?
`He is  debating  which course  is  the most desperate, I think,'  said
Aragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company
to  go east, since we have  been tracked by Gollum,  and  must fear that the
secret of our journey is already betrayed.  But Minas Tirith is no nearer to
the Fire and the destruction of the Burden.
`We may remain there for a while  and make  a brave stand; but the Lord
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond  said was beyond
his power: either to keep the Burden  secret. or to hold  off the full might
of the Enemy when he comes  to take it.  Which way would any of us choose in
Frodo's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.'
'Grievous is our loss,'  said Legolas.  'Yet we must needs make up  our
minds without his aid.  Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.'
`And so should I,'  said Gimli. 'We, of course, were only sent  to help
the  Bearer along the  road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us
is under any oath or  command to  seek Mount Doom.  Hard was my parting
from
Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we  have reached the
last  choice, it  is clear to  me that I  cannot leave Frodo. I would choose
Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.'
`And I  too will go with him,' said Legolas. `It would be faithless now
to say farewell.'
'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn. 'But
if  he goes east,  then all need not go  with him; nor  do I think that  all
should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two,
or  one alone.  If  you  would let me choose,  then  I should  appoint three
companions:  Sam, who  could not  bear it otherwise; and  Gimli; and myself.
Boromir  will return to his own city,  where his father and his  people need
him; and with him the others should go, or at  least Meriadoc  and Peregrin,
if Legolas is not willing to leave us.'
`That won't do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and
I  always intended to go wherever he went,  and we still  do. But we did not
realize what that would mean. It  seemed different so far away, in the Shire
or in Rivendell. It  would  be mad and cruel to let Frodo go  to Mordor. Why
can't we stop him?'
'We must stop  him,'  said Pippin.  `And  that is what  he  is worrying
about, I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And he doesn't
like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to
Mordor  alone! ' Pippin shuddered. 'But the dear silly  old hobbit, he ought
to know that he  hasn't got to ask.  He ought  to know that if we can't stop
him, we shan't leave him.'
'Begging  your  pardon,'  said  Sam. 'I don't  think you understand  my
master  at all.  He isn't hesitating about which way  to  go. Of course not!
What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your
pardon,
Master Boromir,' he added, and turned. It was then that they discovered that
Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on  the outside of the circle,
was no longer there.
`Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried.  'He's been a bit
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's  not in this business. He's off to
his  home, as he always said;  and no blame to  him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows
he's got to find the Cracks of Doom,  if  he can. But he's               afraid  . Now it's
come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of
course  he's had  a bit of schooling, so to speak-we  all have-since we left
home, or  he'd be so terrified he'd just  fling  the Ring in the  River  and
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us
either: whether we'll  go along with him or no. He knows we mean to.  That's
another thing that's  bothering  him. If  he  screws himself up to go, he'll
want to go alone. Mark my words!  We're going to  have trouble when he
comes
back. For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.'
'I believe  you speak more  wisely than any of us,  Sam,' said Aragorn.
`And what shall we do, if you prove right? '
'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin.
'I wonder?  '  said Aragorn.  `He is  the Bearer, and  the fate  of the
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or
the  other. Nor  do I  think that we  should succeed, if we tried. There are
other powers at work far stronger.'
`Well, I wish  Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back. and let us
get it over,' said Pippin. `This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?
'
`Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour  is long passed. The morning is  wearing
away. We must call for him.'
At  that  moment Boromir  reappeared.  He  came out from the  trees and
walked  towards them  without speaking.  His  face  looked grim and sad.  He
paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with
his eyes on the ground.
`Where have you been, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. `Have you seen Frodo? '
Boromir hesitated for  a second.  `Yes,  and no,'  he  answered slowly.
`Yes: I found him some way up the hill,  and I spoke to  him. I urged him to
come to  Minas Tirith and  not to go  east. I grew angry and he  left me. He
vanished. I have  never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard
of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not  find him again. I
thought he would return to you.'
'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and not
too kindly at Boromir.
`Yes,' he answered. `I will say no more yet.'
`This is  bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. `I don't know  what this Man has
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put  the thing on? He didn't ought to have;
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!'
'But he wouldn't keep it on`' said Merry. `Not when he had  escaped the
unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.'
`But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages
now.'
`How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn.
`Half  an hour, maybe,' he answered.  `Or it  might be an hour. I  have
wandered for  some time since.  I do not  know! I do not know! ' He  put his
head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.
`An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. `We must try and find him at
once. Come on! '
