'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin.
'I wonder?  '  said Aragorn.  `He is  the Bearer, and  the fate  of the
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or
the  other. Nor  do I  think that we  should succeed, if we tried. There are
other powers at work far stronger.'
`Well, I wish  Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back. and let us
get it over,' said Pippin. `This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?
'
`Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour  is long passed. The morning is  wearing
away. We must call for him.'
At  that  moment Boromir  reappeared.  He  came out from the  trees and
walked  towards them  without speaking.  His  face  looked grim and sad.  He
paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with
his eyes on the ground.
`Where have you been, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. `Have you seen Frodo? '
Boromir hesitated for  a second.  `Yes,  and no,'  he  answered slowly.
`Yes: I found him some way up the hill,  and I spoke to  him. I urged him to
come to  Minas Tirith and  not to go  east. I grew angry and he  left me. He
vanished. I have  never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard
of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not  find him again. I
thought he would return to you.'
'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and not
too kindly at Boromir.
`Yes,' he answered. `I will say no more yet.'
`This is  bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. `I don't know  what this Man has
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put  the thing on? He didn't ought to have;
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!'
'But he wouldn't keep it on`' said Merry. `Not when he had  escaped the
unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.'
`But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages
now.'
`How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn.
`Half  an hour, maybe,' he answered.  `Or it  might be an hour. I  have
wandered for  some time since.  I do not  know! I do not know! ' He  put his
head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.
`An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. `We must try and find him at
once. Come on! '
`Wait  a moment!  ' cried Aragorn. `We must  divide up into pairs,  and
arrange-here, hold on! Wait! '
It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed  off  first.
Merry  and Pippin  had followed, and were already disappearing westward into
the trees  by  the  shore,  shouting:         Frodo! Frodo!       in  their clear,  high
hobbit-voices. Legolas and  Gimli were running.  A  sudden  panic or madness
seemed to have fallen on the Company.
`We  shall all be scattered and lost,' groaned Aragorn. `Boromir!  I do
not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help  now! Go after
those  two  young hobbits,  and guard them at  the least, even if you cannot
find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I
shall return soon.'
Aragorn  sprang swiftly away and  went in pursuit of  Sam. Just  as  he
reached the  little lawn among the rowans  he  overtook him, toiling uphill,
panting and calling,      Frodo!
`Come with me, Sam! '  he said.  `None of us should be alone.  There is
mischief about. I feel it.  I am going to the top, to  the Seat of Amon Hen,
to  see what may be  seen. And look! It is  as  my heart guessed, Frodo went
this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path.
Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead.
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head.
`Whoa,  Sam  Gamgee! ' he said aloud. `Your legs are too short, so  use
your head! Let me  see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not  his way; but he
hasn't  told  us everything. Something scared Mr.  Frodo  badly.  He screwed
himself up  to the point,  sudden. He made up his mind  at last to go. Where
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel
hard.'
Sam passed his hand over  his eyes, brushing  away the  tears. 'Steady,
Gamgee!  ' he said. `Think,  if you can!  He can't fly across rivers, and he
can't  jump  waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's  got  to get back to  the
boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning! '
Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up
he  got and ran on.  He  came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen  by the
shore, where the boats were  drawn up out  of the  water.  No one was there.
There  seemed to be cries in  the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He
stood gazing for a moment. stock-still, gaping.  A boat was sliding down the
bank  all by itself.  With  a shout Sam raced  across  the  grass. The  boat
slipped into the wat
128d
er.
`Coming, Mr. Frodo!  Coming! ' called  Sam, and flung himself  from the
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a  yard. With  a  cry
and a  splash he fell face  downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went
under, and the River closed over his curly head.
An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and
the boat put about. Frodo was  just  in time to grasp Sam by  the hair as he
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.
`Up you come, Sam my lad! ' said Frodo. `Now take my hand! '
`Save me, Mr. Frodo! ' gasped Sam.  `I'm  drownded.  I can't  see  your
hand.'
`Here it is. Don't  pinch, lad! I  won't  let you  go. Tread water  and
don't flounder, or  you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of  the side,
and let me use the paddle! '
With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank. and Sam was
able to scramble out, wet  as a  water-rat.  Frodo  took off  the  Ring  and
stepped ashore again.
`Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ' he said.
'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that's hard! ' said Sam shivering. `That's hard, trying
to  go without me and all. If I hadn't a guessed right, where  would you  be
now? '
`Safely on my way.'
`Safely! ' said Sam. `All alone and without me to help you? I  couldn't
have a borne it, it'd have been the death of me.'
'It would be the death of you to come  with me, Sam,' said  Frodo and I
could not have borne that.'
`Not as certain as being left behind,' said Sam.
`But I am going to Mordor.'
`I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course  you are. And I'm coming
with you.'
`Now, Sam,'  said Frodo, `don't  hinder me!  The  others will be coming
back  at any  minute.  If  they  catch me here. I  shall have  to argue  and
