bank  all by itself.  With  a shout Sam raced  across  the  grass. The  boat
slipped into the wat
128d
er.
`Coming, Mr. Frodo!  Coming! ' called  Sam, and flung himself  from the
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a  yard. With  a  cry
and a  splash he fell face  downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went
under, and the River closed over his curly head.
An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and
the boat put about. Frodo was  just  in time to grasp Sam by  the hair as he
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.
`Up you come, Sam my lad! ' said Frodo. `Now take my hand! '
`Save me, Mr. Frodo! ' gasped Sam.  `I'm  drownded.  I can't  see  your
hand.'
`Here it is. Don't  pinch, lad! I  won't  let you  go. Tread water  and
don't flounder, or  you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of  the side,
and let me use the paddle! '
With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank. and Sam was
able to scramble out, wet  as a  water-rat.  Frodo  took off  the  Ring  and
stepped ashore again.
`Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ' he said.
'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that's hard! ' said Sam shivering. `That's hard, trying
to  go without me and all. If I hadn't a guessed right, where  would you  be
now? '
`Safely on my way.'
`Safely! ' said Sam. `All alone and without me to help you? I  couldn't
have a borne it, it'd have been the death of me.'
'It would be the death of you to come  with me, Sam,' said  Frodo and I
could not have borne that.'
`Not as certain as being left behind,' said Sam.
`But I am going to Mordor.'
`I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course  you are. And I'm coming
with you.'
`Now, Sam,'  said Frodo, `don't  hinder me!  The  others will be coming
back  at any  minute.  If  they  catch me here. I  shall have  to argue  and
explain, and I shall never have  the heart  or  the chance to get off. But I
must go at once. It's the only way.'
`Of course  it is,' answered  Sam.  'But not alone. I'm  coming too, or
neither of us isn't going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.'
Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart.
`Leave one! 'he said. `We'll need it. But you  can't come like  this without
your gear or food or anything.'
'Just  hold on a moment, and  I'll  get my stuff!' cried  Sam  eagerly.
'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping
place,  fished out  his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it  when  he
emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a  spare blanket, and some
extra packages of food, and ran back.
`So all my  plan is spoilt!  ' said Frodo.  `It is  no good  trying  to
escape you. But I'm glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them
again.'
`Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam.
So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo
paddled away from the shore, and the River  bore them swiftly away. down the
western arm, and past  the frowning cliffs  of Tol  Brandir. The roar of the
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help  as Sam could give, it was hard
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive
the boat eastward towards the far shore.
At  length  they  came to land  again  upon the southern slopes of Amon
Lhaw. There  they found a shelving shore, and they  drew the  boat out, high
above the water,  and hid it as well  as  they could behind a great boulder.
Then  shouldering their  burdens,  they set off, seeking a  path  that would
bring them over  the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and  down into the Land of
Shadow.
Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring.
The second part is called       THE TWO TOWERS              , since the events recounted
in it are dominated by       ORTHANC         ,  the citadel  of  Saruman, and  the fortress
of  MINAS MORGUL              that guards the secret entrance  to Mordor;  it  tells  of
the deeds and  perils of  all  the members of the now sundered fellowship, until
the coming of the Great Darkness.
The  third part tells of the  last defence against the Shadow,  and the
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in            THE RETURN OF THE KING.
