for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted  by curses and threats.
"What had it  got in its pocketses?" he said. "It wouldn't say, no precious.
Little cheat. Not a fair  question. It  cheated first, it did. It  broke the
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!"
'That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had
weary days  of it. But from hints dropped among  the snarls I  even gathered
that his padding feet had  taken him  at last to Esgaroth, and even  to  the
streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great
events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name  and
knew where he came from.  We had made no secret of our return journey to his
home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.'
'Then why didn't  he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't  he
come to the Shire?'
'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set
out and  came  back westward, as far as the Great River. But  then he turned
aside. He  was not daunted by  the distance, I am  sure.  No, something else
drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me.
'The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail
was  still fresh  then. Through Mirkwood and back again it  led them, though
they never  caught him. The wood was full of  the  rumour  of  him, dreadful
tales even among beasts and birds. The  Woodmen said that there was some
new
terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to  find nests; it
crept into  holes  to  find  the young; it slipped  through windows  to find
cradles.
'But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wandered
off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then
I made a great mistake. Yes,  Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may
prove the  worst. I let the matter be. I let  him go; for I had much else to
think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman.
'Well, that was  years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark and
dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo
left here. And my search would  have been in vain,  but for the  help that I
had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this  age
of  the world.  Together we  sought  for  Gollum down  the  whole length  of
Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given
up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned
out of the great perils bringing the miserable creature with him.
'What he had  been doing  he would not say. He only wept and  called us
cruel,  with many a      gollum    in his throat; and when we pressed him he  whined
and  cringed, and  rubbed his  long hands, licking his  fingers  as if  they
pained  him, as if he remembered some old torture.  But I am afraid there is
no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile by
mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.'
A heavy silence fell in the room.  Frodo could hear his  heart beating.
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's  shears could now be
heard.
'Yes,  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things,
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to  gather them there.  The Ring
of the Enemy would leave  its  mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And
all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred
of  the  West.  There were his fine  new  friends, who would help him in his
revenge!
'Wretched  fool!  In that land he  would  learn  much, too much for his
comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on  the borders he would
be caught, and taken - for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When
he was found he  had already been  there long,  and was on his  way back. On
some errand  of  mischief. But  that  does  not matter  much now. His  worst
mischief was done.
'Yes, alas! through  him the  Enemy has learned that the One  has  been
found again. He  knows where Isildur fell. He knows  where  Gollum found his
ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that
it is not one of the  Three, for they have  never been lost, and they endure
no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are
accounted for.  He  knows that it is  the One.  And he has  at last heard, I
think, of   hobbits   and the   Shire.
'The Shire - he may be seeking for  it now, if he has not already found
out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that  he may  even think  that  the
long-unnoticed name of         Baggins     has become important.'
'But this is  terrible!' cried Frodo. 'Far  worse than the worst that I
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I
to do? For now I am really afraid. What  am  I to do? What a pity that Bilbo
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!'
'Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike
without need. And  he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so
little hurt from the evil,  and escaped  in  the  end, because he began  his
ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.'
'I am sorry,' said  Frodo.  'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any
pity for Gollum.'
'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in.
'No,  and I don't  want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you
mean to  say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on  after all  those
horrible  deeds? Now at any rate he is  as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy.
He deserves death.'
'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager  to
deal out death in judgement.  For  even the very wise cannot see all ends. I
have not much hope  that Gollum can be cured before  he dies, but there is a
chance of it. And  he is bound  up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells
me that  he  has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and
when that comes, the pity  of Bilbo may  rule the fate  of many -  yours not
least. In any case we did  not kill him:  he is very old  and very wretched.
The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such  kindness as
they can find in their wise hearts.'
'All the same,' said Frodo,  'even if  Bilbo could  not kill  Gollum, I
wish he had not kept the  Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had
not got it!  Why  did  you  let me keep it? Why didn't you make me  throw it
away, or, or destroy it?'
'Let you? Make you?' said the  wizard.  'Haven't you been  listening to
all  that I  have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying.  But as
for throwing  it away,  that was  obviously wrong. These Rings have a way of
being  found. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst  of all, it
might have fallen into the  hands of the Enemy. Indeed  it certainly  would;
for this is the One, and  he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it
to himself.
'Of  course, my  dear  Frodo,  it  was dangerous  for you; and that has
troubled me deeply. But there  was so  much at stake that I had to take some
risk  - though even when  I was far away there has never been a day when the
Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I
did not think  that the Ring would have  any lasting effect on  you, not for
evil,  not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine
