Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring.
The second part is called       THE TWO TOWERS              , since the events recounted
in it are dominated by       ORTHANC         ,  the citadel  of  Saruman, and  the fortress
of  MINAS MORGUL              that guards the secret entrance  to Mordor;  it  tells  of
the deeds and  perils of  all  the members of the now sundered fellowship, until
the coming of the Great Darkness.
The  third part tells of the  last defence against the Shadow,  and the
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in            THE RETURN OF THE KING.
* BOOK III *
Chapter 1. The Departure of Boromir
Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground.
Hobbits go light, and  their  footprints are not  easy  even for a Ranger to
read, but not  far from the top a spring  crossed  the path, and in the  wet
earth he saw what he was seeking.
'I read the  signs  aright,'  he  said  to himself. 'Frodo  ran  to the
hill-top. I wonder what he  saw there? But he returned by  the same way, and
went down the hill again.'
Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to
see there something that  would guide him in his perplexities; but  time was
pressing. Suddenly he leaped  forward, and  ran to the  summit,  across  the
great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked
out. But the  sun seemed darkened,  and the world dim and remote.  He turned
from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save  the distant hills,
unless it were  that far away he could see again  a great bird like an eagle
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth.
Even as he  gazed his  quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below,
on the west  side  of the River. He stiffened.  There were  cries, and among
them, to  his  horror, he  could distinguish the harsh voices of  Orcs. Then
suddenly with  a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the  blasts of it
smote the hills and  echoed  in the hollows, rising  in a mighty shout above
the roaring of the falls.
'The horn of  Boromir!' he cried. 'He is  in need!' He  sprang down the
steps and away, leaping down the path. 'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day,
and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?'
As he ran the cries  came louder, but fainter  now and  desperately the
horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs, and suddenly
the horn-calls  ceased.  Aragorn  raced  down the last slope,  but before he
could reach  the hill's foot, the sounds died away;  and as he turned to the
left and ran towards them  they  retreated, until at last he could hear them
no more. Drawing  his bright sword and crying                Elendil!  Elendil!      he crashed
through the trees.
