* BOOK III *
Chapter 1. The Departure of Boromir
Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground.
Hobbits go light, and  their  footprints are not  easy  even for a Ranger to
read, but not  far from the top a spring  crossed  the path, and in the  wet
earth he saw what he was seeking.
'I read the  signs  aright,'  he  said  to himself. 'Frodo  ran  to the
hill-top. I wonder what he  saw there? But he returned by  the same way, and
went down the hill again.'
Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to
see there something that  would guide him in his perplexities; but  time was
pressing. Suddenly he leaped  forward, and  ran to the  summit,  across  the
great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked
out. But the  sun seemed darkened,  and the world dim and remote.  He turned
from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save  the distant hills,
unless it were  that far away he could see again  a great bird like an eagle
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth.
Even as he  gazed his  quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below,
on the west  side  of the River. He stiffened.  There were  cries, and among
them, to  his  horror, he  could distinguish the harsh voices of  Orcs. Then
suddenly with  a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the  blasts of it
smote the hills and  echoed  in the hollows, rising  in a mighty shout above
the roaring of the falls.
'The horn of  Boromir!' he cried. 'He is  in need!' He  sprang down the
steps and away, leaping down the path. 'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day,
and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?'
As he ran the cries  came louder, but fainter  now and  desperately the
horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs, and suddenly
the horn-calls  ceased.  Aragorn  raced  down the last slope,  but before he
could reach  the hill's foot, the sounds died away;  and as he turned to the
left and ran towards them  they  retreated, until at last he could hear them
no more. Drawing  his bright sword and crying                Elendil!  Elendil!      he crashed
through the trees.
A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake
he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree, as if he was
resting.  But  Aragorn saw  that he was pierced  with  many  black-feathered
arrows; his sword  was still in his hand, but it  was  broken near the hilt;
his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many Orcs lay slain, piled all about
him and at his feet.
Aragorn knelt beside him.  Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak.
At last slow  words came. 'I tried to take the Ring from Frodo ' he said. 'I
am sorry. I have paid.' His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;  twenty at
least lay there. 'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I
think they  are  not  dead. Orcs bound them.' He paused and  his eyes closed
wearily. After a moment he spoke again.
'Farewell, Aragorn!  Go to  Minas Tirith  and  save my  people!  I have
failed.'
'No!'  said  Aragorn,  taking his hand and kissing  his brow. 'You have
conquered. Few  have gained such a  victory. Be at peace! Minas Tirith shall
not fall!'
Boromir smiled.
'Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?' said Aragorn.
But Boromir did not speak again.
'Alas!' said  Aragorn. 'Thus  passes the  heir of Denethor, Lord of the
Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all  in ruin. It is
I that  have failed. Vain was Gandalf's  trust in me.  What  shall I do now?
Boromir has laid it on  me  to go  to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it;
but where are the  Ring and the Bearer? How shall I  find them  and save the
Quest from disaster?'
He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand.
So it  was  that Legolas  and  Gimli  found him.  They came from the western
slopes of the hill, silently, creeping  through  the  trees as if  they were
hunting. Gimli had  his axe in hand,  and  Legolas  his long knife:  all his
arrows were spent. When  they came into the  glade they halted in amazement;
and  then they stood a moment with heads bowed  in  grief,  for it seemed to
them plain what had happened.
'Alas!'  said Legolas, coming to  Aragorn's  side. 'We have  hunted and
slain many  Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use  here. We
came when we heard the horn-but too late, it  seems. I  fear  you have taken
deadly hurt.'
'Boromir  is dead,' said Aragorn. 'I am unscathed,  for  I was not here
with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.'
'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?'
'I do not know,' answered Aragorn wearily. 'Before he died Boromir told
me that the Orcs had  bound them;  he  did not think that they were  dead. I
sent him  to follow  Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam
were with him: not until it was too  late.  All  that I have done  today has
gone amiss. What is to be done now?'
'First  we must tend the fallen,'  said Legolas. 'We  cannot  leave him
lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.'
'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We
must follow the Orcs, if there is hope  that  any of our Company are  living
prisoners.'
'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them  or not ' said
Aragorn.  'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice
is now before us!'
'Then let us do first what we must do,' said  Legolas. 'We have not the
time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A
cairn we might build.'
'The labour would be hard and long:  there are no stones that we  could
use nearer than the water-side,' said Gimli.
'Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his
vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and
give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil
creature dishonours his bones.'
Quickly  they searched the bodies of  the Orcs, gathering  their swords
and cloven helms and shields into  a  heap. 'See!' cried  Aragorn. 'Here  we
find  tokens!' He picked  out  from the  pile  of grim weapons  two  knives,
leaf-bladed, damasked  in gold and red;  and searching further he found also
the sheaths,  black, set with small red gems. 'No orc-tools these!' he said.
'They were  borne by  the hobbits.  Doubtless the  Orcs despoiled them,  but
feared  to keep  the knives,  knowing  them  for  what  they  are:  work  of
Westernesse, wound about with spells  for the  bane of Mordor. Well, now, if
they still  live,  our  friends are  weaponless. I will  take these  things,
hoping against hope, to give them back.'
'And  I,' said Legolas,  'will take all the arrows that I can find, for
my quiver is empty.' He  searched  in the  pile  and on the ground about and
