'Boromir  is dead,' said Aragorn. 'I am unscathed,  for  I was not here
with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.'
'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?'
'I do not know,' answered Aragorn wearily. 'Before he died Boromir told
me that the Orcs had  bound them;  he  did not think that they were  dead. I
sent him  to follow  Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam
were with him: not until it was too  late.  All  that I have done  today has
gone amiss. What is to be done now?'
'First  we must tend the fallen,'  said Legolas. 'We  cannot  leave him
lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.'
'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We
must follow the Orcs, if there is hope  that  any of our Company are  living
prisoners.'
'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them  or not ' said
Aragorn.  'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice
is now before us!'
'Then let us do first what we must do,' said  Legolas. 'We have not the
time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A
cairn we might build.'
'The labour would be hard and long:  there are no stones that we  could
use nearer than the water-side,' said Gimli.
'Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his
vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and
give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil
creature dishonours his bones.'
Quickly  they searched the bodies of  the Orcs, gathering  their swords
and cloven helms and shields into  a  heap. 'See!' cried  Aragorn. 'Here  we
find  tokens!' He picked  out  from the  pile  of grim weapons  two  knives,
leaf-bladed, damasked  in gold and red;  and searching further he found also
the sheaths,  black, set with small red gems. 'No orc-tools these!' he said.
'They were  borne by  the hobbits.  Doubtless the  Orcs despoiled them,  but
feared  to keep  the knives,  knowing  them  for  what  they  are:  work  of
Westernesse, wound about with spells  for the  bane of Mordor. Well, now, if
they still  live,  our  friends are  weaponless. I will  take these  things,
hoping against hope, to give them back.'
'And  I,' said Legolas,  'will take all the arrows that I can find, for
my quiver is empty.' He  searched  in the  pile  and on the ground about and
found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows
as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at them closely.
And  Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: 'Here  lie many that are
not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty  Mountains, if I
know  anything of Orcs and their kinds.  And here are others  strange to me.
Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at all!'
There were four goblin-soldiers of greater  stature, swart, slant-eyed,
with thick  legs and  large hands. They  were armed with short  broad-bladed
swords, not with  the curved scimitars usual with Orcs: and they had bows of
yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men.  Upon their shields they bore
a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black field; on  the
front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, wrought of some white metal.
'I have not seen  these tokens  before,'  said Aragorn.  'What  do they
mean?'
'S is for Sauron,' said Gimli. 'That is easy to read.'
'Nay!' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.'
'Neither  does he  use  his right name,  nor permit it  to be  spelt or
spoken,' said Aragorn. 'And he does  not use white. The  Orcs in the service
of Barad-dyr use the sign of the Red Eye.' He stood for a moment in thought.
'S is for Saruman, I  guess,'  he  said at length. 'There  is evil afoot  in
Isengard,  and the West is no longer safe. It is  as Gandalf feared: by some
means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. It is likely too that
he  knows  of  Gandalf's  fall.  Pursuers  from Moria may  have escaped  the
vigilance of Lurien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard
by other  paths. Orcs travel  fast.  But  Saruman has many  ways of learning
news. Do you remember the birds?'
'Well,  we  have no time to ponder riddles,' said  Gimli. 'Let us  bear
Boromir away!'
'But  after that  we  must guess  the riddles, if we  are to choose our
course rightly,' answered Aragorn.
'Maybe there is no right choice,' said Gimli.
Taking his axe the  Dwarf now  cut  several branches. These they lashed
together with bowstrings, and spread their  cloaks upon the frame. Upon this
rough bier they carried the  body of  their companion to the shore, together
with such trophies of  his last battle as they chose to send forth with him.
It was only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for  Boromir was  a
man both tall and strong.
At the water-side Aragorn  remained, watching the  bier. while  Legolas
and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth  Galen. It was  a mile or more, and
it was some time before they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the
shore.
'There is a strange tale  to tell!'  said Legolas. 'There are  only two
boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.'
'Have Orcs been there?' asked Aragorn.
'We saw no signs of  them,' answered Gimli. 'And Orcs  would have taken
or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.'
'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn.
Now they laid  Boromir  in the middle of the boat that  was to bear him
away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed beneath his head.
They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden
belt of Lurien gleamed  about  his waist. His helm they set beside  him, and
across  his lap  they laid the  cloven horn and  the hilts and shards of his
sword; beneath his  feet  they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening
the  prow to the stern of the other boat,  they drew him out into the water.
They rowed sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift-running channel
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep  sides of  Tol Brandir
were  glowing:  it  was now  mid-afternoon.  As they  went south the fume of
Rauros rose and  shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and thunder
of the falls shook the windless air.
Sorrowfully  they  cast loose  the funeral  boat:  there  Boromir  lay,
restful, peaceful, gliding upon  the bosom of the  flowing water. The stream
took him while they  held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated
by  them, and slowly  his  boat departed, waning to  a dark spot against the
golden  light;  and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros  roared on unchanging.
The River  had taken Boromir  son of Denethor,  and he was not seen again in
Minas  Tirith,  standing as he used to  stand  upon  the  White Tower in the
morning. But  in Gondor in after-days it long  was said that  the elven-boat
rode  the falls  and the foaming pool, and bore him down  through Osgiliath,
and  past the many mouths of Anduin, out  into the Great Sea at night  under
the stars.
For a  while  the three companions remained  silent,  gazing after him.
Then  Aragorn spoke. 'They will look for him from the White Tower,' he said,
'but he will not return from mountain or from  sea.' Then slowly he began to
sing:
