At the water-side Aragorn  remained, watching the  bier. while  Legolas
and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth  Galen. It was  a mile or more, and
it was some time before they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the
shore.
'There is a strange tale  to tell!'  said Legolas. 'There are  only two
boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.'
'Have Orcs been there?' asked Aragorn.
'We saw no signs of  them,' answered Gimli. 'And Orcs  would have taken
or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.'
'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn.
Now they laid  Boromir  in the middle of the boat that  was to bear him
away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed beneath his head.
They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden
belt of Lurien gleamed  about  his waist. His helm they set beside  him, and
across  his lap  they laid the  cloven horn and  the hilts and shards of his
sword; beneath his  feet  they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening
the  prow to the stern of the other boat,  they drew him out into the water.
They rowed sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift-running channel
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep  sides of  Tol Brandir
were  glowing:  it  was now  mid-afternoon.  As they  went south the fume of
Rauros rose and  shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and thunder
of the falls shook the windless air.
Sorrowfully  they  cast loose  the funeral  boat:  there  Boromir  lay,
restful, peaceful, gliding upon  the bosom of the  flowing water. The stream
took him while they  held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated
by  them, and slowly  his  boat departed, waning to  a dark spot against the
golden  light;  and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros  roared on unchanging.
The River  had taken Boromir  son of Denethor,  and he was not seen again in
Minas  Tirith,  standing as he used to  stand  upon  the  White Tower in the
morning. But  in Gondor in after-days it long  was said that  the elven-boat
rode  the falls  and the foaming pool, and bore him down  through Osgiliath,
and  past the many mouths of Anduin, out  into the Great Sea at night  under
the stars.
For a  while  the three companions remained  silent,  gazing after him.
Then  Aragorn spoke. 'They will look for him from the White Tower,' he said,
'but he will not return from mountain or from  sea.' Then slowly he began to
sing:
Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows
The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes.
'What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight?
Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?'
'I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey;
I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away
Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more.
The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor.'
'O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar,
But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.'
Then Legolas sang:
From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones;
The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans.
'What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve?
Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.'
'Ask not of me where he doth dwell-so many bones there lie
On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky;
So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea.
Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me!'
'O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south,
But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea's mouth.'
Then Aragorn sang again:
From the  Gate  of Kings  the  North Wind rides,  and past the  roaring falls;
And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls.
'What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today?
What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.'
'Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought.
His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought.
His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest;
And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.'
'O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze
To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end of days.'
So they ended. Then they  turned  their boat and drove it with all  the
speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen.
'You left the  East Wind to  me,' said Gimli, 'but I will say naught of
it.'
'That is as it should be,' said Aragorn. 'In  Minas Tirith  they endure
the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir has taken
his road. and we must make haste to choose our own.'
He surveyed the green  lawn, quickly but  thoroughly, stooping often to
the earth. 'The Orcs have been on this ground,' he  said. 'Otherwise nothing
can be made  out for certain. All  our  footprints  are  here, crossing  and
re-crossing. I cannot  tell  whether any of the hobbits have come back since
the search for  Frodo  began.'  He returned  to the bank, close to where the
rill  from the  spring  trickled  out into  the River. 'There are some clear
prints here,' he  said. 'A hobbit waded out into the water and  back; but  I
cannot say how long ago.'
'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli.
Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the  camping-place and
looked  at  the baggage. 'Two  packs  are  missing.' he  said, 'and  one  is
certainly Sam's:  it was rather large and heavy.  This  then  is the answer:
Frodo  has gone by boat, and his servant has  gone with him. Frodo must have
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to
follow me;  but plainly he  did  not do so. He guessed his master s mind and
came  back here before Frodo had gone. He did  not find it easy to leave Sam
behind!'
'But why should  he leave  us behind, and without  a word?' said Gimli.
'That was a strange deed!'
'And a  brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right,  I think.  Frodo did
not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he
must go himself. Something happened after he left us that  overcame his fear
and doubt.'
'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,' said Legolas.
'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Orcs.' What
he  thought was  the cause of Frodo's  sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did
not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret.
'Well,  so much  at  least  is now clear,'  said Legolas:  'Frodo is no
longer on this side of the  River:  only he can have taken the boat. And Sam
is with him; only he would have taken his pack.'
'Our  choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the  remaining  boat
and follow Frodo, or else to follow  the Orcs on foot. There is little  hope
either way. We have already lost precious hours.'
'Let me  think!' said Aragorn. 'And now  may I make a  right choice and
change the  evil fate of this unhappy day!' He stood silent for a moment. 'I
will follow the Orcs,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor
