his road. and we must make haste to choose our own.'
He surveyed the green  lawn, quickly but  thoroughly, stooping often to
the earth. 'The Orcs have been on this ground,' he  said. 'Otherwise nothing
can be made  out for certain. All  our  footprints  are  here, crossing  and
re-crossing. I cannot  tell  whether any of the hobbits have come back since
the search for  Frodo  began.'  He returned  to the bank, close to where the
rill  from the  spring  trickled  out into  the River. 'There are some clear
prints here,' he  said. 'A hobbit waded out into the water and  back; but  I
cannot say how long ago.'
'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli.
Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the  camping-place and
looked  at  the baggage. 'Two  packs  are  missing.' he  said, 'and  one  is
certainly Sam's:  it was rather large and heavy.  This  then  is the answer:
Frodo  has gone by boat, and his servant has  gone with him. Frodo must have
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to
follow me;  but plainly he  did  not do so. He guessed his master s mind and
came  back here before Frodo had gone. He did  not find it easy to leave Sam
behind!'
'But why should  he leave  us behind, and without  a word?' said Gimli.
'That was a strange deed!'
'And a  brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right,  I think.  Frodo did
not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he
must go himself. Something happened after he left us that  overcame his fear
and doubt.'
'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,' said Legolas.
'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Orcs.' What
he  thought was  the cause of Frodo's  sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did
not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret.
'Well,  so much  at  least  is now clear,'  said Legolas:  'Frodo is no
longer on this side of the  River:  only he can have taken the boat. And Sam
is with him; only he would have taken his pack.'
'Our  choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the  remaining  boat
and follow Frodo, or else to follow  the Orcs on foot. There is little  hope
either way. We have already lost precious hours.'
'Let me  think!' said Aragorn. 'And now  may I make a  right choice and
change the  evil fate of this unhappy day!' He stood silent for a moment. 'I
will follow the Orcs,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor
and  gone with  him to the end; but if I  seek him now  in the wilderness, I
must abandon the captives to torment  and death.  My heart speaks clearly at
last: the fate  of the Bearer  is in  my  hands no  longer.  The Company has
played  its part. Yet we that  remain cannot forsake our companions while we
have strength left.  Come!  We  will go  now. Leave  all  that can be spared
behind! We will press on by day and dark!'
They drew up the  last  boat  and carried  it to  the trees.  They laid
beneath  it such of their goods  as  they did not  need  and could not carry
away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading as they came back
to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the
Orcs. It needed little skill to find.
'No other folk  make such  a trampling,' said Legolas. 'It seems  their
delight to slash and beat down  growing  things that are not even  in  their
way.'
'But they go with a great  speed for all that,' said Aragorn, 'and they
do not  tire. And later we  may have  to  search for our  path  in hard bare
lands.'
'Well, after  them!' said Gimli. 'Dwarves too can  go swiftly, and they
do not tire sooner  than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long
start.'
'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'we  shall all need the endurance of  Dwarves. But
come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our enemies. And
woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We  will make such a chase as shall be
accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds µ Elves. Dwarves, and Men.
Forth
the Three Hunters!'
Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led
them,  tireless and swift, now that his mind  was at last made up. The woods
about the lake they left behind. Long slopes  they climbed, dark, hard-edged
against the  sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed away,  grey
shadows in a stony land.
Chapter 2. The Riders of Rohan
Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and  brooded
on  the pale margins of the Anduin, but the  sky was clear. Stars  came out.
The waxing  moon  was riding in the West, and the shadows of the rocks  were
black. They had come to  the feet of stony hills, and their pace was slower,
for the trail was no longer easy to  follow. Here the highlands of the  Emyn
Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of
each ridge was steep  and difficult, but  the  eastward slopes were gentler,
furrowed  with  many  gullies  and  narrow  ravines.  All  night  the  three
companions scrambled in  this bony land, climbing to the  crest of the first
and tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley
on the other side.
There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space.
The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered above them; the
first light  of day had not  yet come over the dark  hills behind.  For  the
moment Aragorn was at a loss:  the  orc-trail had descended into the valley,
but there it had vanished.
'Which way would they turn, do you  think?' said Legolas. 'Northward to
take a straighter road to Isengard,  or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you
guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?'
'They will not make  for  the  river,  whatever mark they aim at'' said
Aragorn. 'And unless there is much amiss  in Rohan and  the power of Saruman
is greatly increased;  they will take  the  shortest way that they  can find
over the fields of the Rohirrim. Let us search northwards!'
The  dale  ran like  a stony  trough between  the  ridged  hills, and a
trickling stream flowed among the boulders  at the  bottom. A cliff  frowned
upon their right; to their left rose  grey  slopes, dim  and shadowy in  the
late night.  They  went  on  for  a  mile  or  more northwards. Aragorn  was
searching. bent towards  the ground,  among the folds and gullies leading up
into  the western ridge. Legolas was some way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a
cry and the others came running towards him.
'We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,' he said.
'Look!' He pointed, and they saw that  what they had  at  first  taken to be
boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled  bodies. Five dead Orcs
