Chapter 2. The Riders of Rohan
Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and  brooded
on  the pale margins of the Anduin, but the  sky was clear. Stars  came out.
The waxing  moon  was riding in the West, and the shadows of the rocks  were
black. They had come to  the feet of stony hills, and their pace was slower,
for the trail was no longer easy to  follow. Here the highlands of the  Emyn
Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of
each ridge was steep  and difficult, but  the  eastward slopes were gentler,
furrowed  with  many  gullies  and  narrow  ravines.  All  night  the  three
companions scrambled in  this bony land, climbing to the  crest of the first
and tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley
on the other side.
There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space.
The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered above them; the
first light  of day had not  yet come over the dark  hills behind.  For  the
moment Aragorn was at a loss:  the  orc-trail had descended into the valley,
but there it had vanished.
'Which way would they turn, do you  think?' said Legolas. 'Northward to
take a straighter road to Isengard,  or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you
guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?'
'They will not make  for  the  river,  whatever mark they aim at'' said
Aragorn. 'And unless there is much amiss  in Rohan and  the power of Saruman
is greatly increased;  they will take  the  shortest way that they  can find
over the fields of the Rohirrim. Let us search northwards!'
The  dale  ran like  a stony  trough between  the  ridged  hills, and a
trickling stream flowed among the boulders  at the  bottom. A cliff  frowned
upon their right; to their left rose  grey  slopes, dim  and shadowy in  the
late night.  They  went  on  for  a  mile  or  more northwards. Aragorn  was
searching. bent towards  the ground,  among the folds and gullies leading up
into  the western ridge. Legolas was some way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a
cry and the others came running towards him.
'We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,' he said.
'Look!' He pointed, and they saw that  what they had  at  first  taken to be
boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled  bodies. Five dead Orcs
lay there. They had  been hewn  with many  cruel strokes, and  two had  been
beheaded. The ground was wet with their dark blood.
'Here is another riddle!' said Gimli.  'But it needs the light  of  day
and for that we cannot wait.'
'Yet however you  read it,  it  seems  not  unhopeful,'  said  Legolas.
'Enemies  of the  Orcs  are  likely to  be our friends. Do any folk dwell in
these hills?'
'No,' said Aragorn. 'The Rohirrim seldom come  here, and it is far from
Minas Tirith. It might be that some  company of  Men  were  hunting here for
reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.'
'What do you think?' said Gimli.
'I think that  the  enemy  brought his  own enemy  with  him,' answered
Aragorn. 'These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among the slain are none of
the great  Orcs with the strange badges. There was a quarrel, I guess: it is
no uncommon thing with these foul  folk. Maybe there was some  dispute about
the road.'
'Or about the  captives,' said  Gimli. 'Let us hope that they, too, did
not meet their end here.'
Aragorn  searched the ground in a wide  circle,  but no other traces of
the fight could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky was turning
pale; the  stars were fading, and a grey light was  slowly growing. A little
further  north they  came  to  a fold  in which a tiny stream,  falling  and
winding, had cut a stony path down into  the valley. In it some bushes grew,
and there were patches of grass upon its sides.
'At last!'  said Aragorn.  'Here are  the tracks that  we seek! Up this
water-channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their debate.'
Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path.  As if fresh
from a  night's rest they sprang  from stone to stone. At last  they reached
the  crest of  the  grey hill,  and a  sudden breeze blew in  their hair and
stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn.
Turning  back they saw across  the  River  the  far hills kindled.  Day
leaped into the sky. The red rim of the  sun rose over  the shoulders of the
dark  land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless  and grey;
but even  as they looked,  the shadows of night melted, the  colours  of the
waking earth returned: green flowed over the wide meads  of Rohan; the white
mists shimmered in  the watervales;  and far off to the left, thirty leagues
or more, blue  and purple stood the  White Mountains,  rising  into peaks of
jet, tipped with glimmering snows, flushed with the rose of morning.
'Gondor! Gondor!' cried  Aragorn. 'Would that I looked on  you again in
happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams.
Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea!
West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree
Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old.
O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold!
O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree,
Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?
Now  let  us go!' he said, drawing his  eyes away from  the South,  and
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread.
The ridge upon  which the companions  stood  went down  steeply  before
their feet. Below it twenty  fathoms or  more, there was  a wide and  rugged
shelf which ended suddenly in the brink  of a sheer  cliff: the East Wall of
Rohan.  So  ended  the  Emyn Muil, and  the  green plains  of  the  Rohirrim
stretched away before them to the edge of sight.
'Look!' cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. 'There
is the eagle  again! He is very high. He seems  to be flying now away,  from
this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!'
'No, not even my eyes can  see him, my good Legolas,' said Aragorn. 'He
must  be far aloft indeed. I wonder  what  is his errand, if he is the  same
bird that I have seen before. But look! I  can  see something nearer at hand
and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!'
'Many  things,'  said  Legolas. 'It is a great company on foot;  but  I
cannot  say  more,  nor see what kind of folk they  may  be. They  are  many
leagues  away: twelve,  I  guess; but  the flatness of the plain is hard  to
measure.'
'I think,  nonetheless, that we no longer  need any  trail  to  tell us
which  way  to go,' said Gimli. 'Let  us find a path down to  the  fields as
quick as may be.'
'I  doubt  if you will  find a path quicker  than the one that the Orcs
chose,' said Aragorn.
They  followed their enemies now  by the clear light  of day. It seemed
that the Orcs had  pressed on with all possible speed. Every  now  and again
the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the
rinds and crusts of hard grey bread. a torn black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed
shoe  broken on the stones. The trail  led them  north along the top  of the
