jet, tipped with glimmering snows, flushed with the rose of morning.
'Gondor! Gondor!' cried  Aragorn. 'Would that I looked on  you again in
happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams.
Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea!
West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree
Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old.
O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold!
O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree,
Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?
Now  let  us go!' he said, drawing his  eyes away from  the South,  and
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread.
The ridge upon  which the companions  stood  went down  steeply  before
their feet. Below it twenty  fathoms or  more, there was  a wide and  rugged
shelf which ended suddenly in the brink  of a sheer  cliff: the East Wall of
Rohan.  So  ended  the  Emyn Muil, and  the  green plains  of  the  Rohirrim
stretched away before them to the edge of sight.
'Look!' cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. 'There
is the eagle  again! He is very high. He seems  to be flying now away,  from
this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!'
'No, not even my eyes can  see him, my good Legolas,' said Aragorn. 'He
must  be far aloft indeed. I wonder  what  is his errand, if he is the  same
bird that I have seen before. But look! I  can  see something nearer at hand
and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!'
'Many  things,'  said  Legolas. 'It is a great company on foot;  but  I
cannot  say  more,  nor see what kind of folk they  may  be. They  are  many
leagues  away: twelve,  I  guess; but  the flatness of the plain is hard  to
measure.'
'I think,  nonetheless, that we no longer  need any  trail  to  tell us
which  way  to go,' said Gimli. 'Let  us find a path down to  the  fields as
quick as may be.'
'I  doubt  if you will  find a path quicker  than the one that the Orcs
chose,' said Aragorn.
They  followed their enemies now  by the clear light  of day. It seemed
that the Orcs had  pressed on with all possible speed. Every  now  and again
the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the
rinds and crusts of hard grey bread. a torn black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed
shoe  broken on the stones. The trail  led them  north along the top  of the
escarpment, and at length they  came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a
stream  that  splashed  noisily down.  In the  narrow  ravine  a rough  path
descended like a steep stair into the plain.
At  the bottom  they came with  a strange  suddenness  on the grass  of
Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn Muil. The
falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and water-plants,  and
they could  hear it tinkling away in green tunnels, down long gentle  slopes
towards the fens of Entwash Vale far  away.  They seemed to have left winter
clinging  to  the  hills  behind. Here  the air was softer  and warmer,  and
faintly  scented,  as if spring was already stirring and the sap was flowing
again in  herb and leaf. Legolas took a deep breath,  like one that drinks a
great draught after long thirst in barren places.
'Ah!  the green smell!'  he said. 'It is better than much sleep. Let us
run!'
'Light feet may run swiftly here,' said Aragorn.  'More swiftly, maybe,
than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their lead!'
They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong scent, and an
eager  light was  in their eyes.  Nearly due  west the  broad  swath  of the
marching Orcs  tramped  its  ugly slot;  the sweet  grass of  Rohan had been
bruised and  blackened as  they  passed. Presently  Aragorn  gave a cry  and
turned aside. 'Stay!' he shouted. 'Do not follow me yet!'  He ran quickly to
the right, away  from the  main trail; for he had seen  footprints that went
that way, branching off  from the  others,  the  marks of small unshod feet.
These, however, did  not go far before they were crossed by orc-prints, also
coming out  from the main  trail behind and in  front, and then  they curved
sharply back  again  and were lost  in the  trampling. At the furthest point
Aragorn stooped and picked up something from the grass; then he ran back.
'Yes,' he said, 'they are quite plain:  a hobbit's footprints. Pippin's
I think. He is smaller than the other. And look at this! He held up a  thing
that glittered in  the sunlight. It  looked  like  the new-opened leaf of  a
beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain.
'The brooch of an elven-cloak!' cried Legolas and Gimli together.
'Not idly do the leaves of Lurien  fall,' said  Aragorn.  'This did not
drop by chance: it  was  cast away as  a token to  any that  might follow. I
think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.'
'Then he at least was alive,'  said  Gimli. 'And he  had the use of his
wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.'
'Let us hope that  he  did not pay  too dearly for his  boldness,' said
Legolas. 'Come! Let us  go on! The thought of those merry young folk  driven
like cattle burns my heart.'
The  sun climbed to  the noon and then rode slowly  down the sky. Light
clouds  came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon
the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from
the East. Still the hunters held on.  One day  now had  passed since Boromir
fell, and  the Orcs were yet far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be
seen in the level plains.
As nightshade was closing about  them Aragorn halted. Only twice in the
day's  march had they rested for a brief  while, and twelve leagues  now lay
between them and the eastern wall where they had stood at dawn.
'We have  come at last  to  a hard choice,' he said. 'Shall we  rest by
night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?'
'Unless  our enemies rest also, they  will  leave us far  behind, if we
stay to  sleep.' said Legolas. 'Surely even Orcs must pause on  the  march?'
said Gimli. 'Seldom will  Orcs journey in the open under the sun.  yet these
have done so,' said Legolas. 'Certainly they will not rest by night.'
'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,' said Gimli.
'The trail is straight, and turns  neither right nor left, as far as my
eyes can see,' said Legolas.
'Maybe,  I could  lead you  at guess in the darkness  and  hold  to the
line,'  said  Aragorn;  'but  if we strayed, or they turned aside, then when
light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again.'
'And  there  is  this also,' said Gimli: 'only by day can we see if any
tracks lead away.  If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be  carried
off, eastward,  say, to the Great River,  towards Mordor, we might pass  the
signs and never know it.'
'That  is true,'  said Aragorn. 'But if I  read  the signs back  yonder
rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company  is now
bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.'
'Yet it would  be rash to be sure of  their counsels,' said Gimli. 'And
what of escape? In the dark we  should have passed the signs that led you to
the brooch.'
'The Orcs will  be doubly on their  guard since then, and the prisoners
even wearier,' said Legolas. 'There will  be no  escape again, if we  do not
contrive  it. How  that is to be done cannot  be guessed, but first we  must
