'Let us hope that  he  did not pay  too dearly for his  boldness,' said
Legolas. 'Come! Let us  go on! The thought of those merry young folk  driven
like cattle burns my heart.'
The  sun climbed to  the noon and then rode slowly  down the sky. Light
clouds  came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon
the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from
the East. Still the hunters held on.  One day  now had  passed since Boromir
fell, and  the Orcs were yet far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be
seen in the level plains.
As nightshade was closing about  them Aragorn halted. Only twice in the
day's  march had they rested for a brief  while, and twelve leagues  now lay
between them and the eastern wall where they had stood at dawn.
'We have  come at last  to  a hard choice,' he said. 'Shall we  rest by
night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?'
'Unless  our enemies rest also, they  will  leave us far  behind, if we
stay to  sleep.' said Legolas. 'Surely even Orcs must pause on  the  march?'
said Gimli. 'Seldom will  Orcs journey in the open under the sun.  yet these
have done so,' said Legolas. 'Certainly they will not rest by night.'
'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,' said Gimli.
'The trail is straight, and turns  neither right nor left, as far as my
eyes can see,' said Legolas.
'Maybe,  I could  lead you  at guess in the darkness  and  hold  to the
line,'  said  Aragorn;  'but  if we strayed, or they turned aside, then when
light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again.'
'And  there  is  this also,' said Gimli: 'only by day can we see if any
tracks lead away.  If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be  carried
off, eastward,  say, to the Great River,  towards Mordor, we might pass  the
signs and never know it.'
'That  is true,'  said Aragorn. 'But if I  read  the signs back  yonder
rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company  is now
bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.'
'Yet it would  be rash to be sure of  their counsels,' said Gimli. 'And
what of escape? In the dark we  should have passed the signs that led you to
the brooch.'
'The Orcs will  be doubly on their  guard since then, and the prisoners
even wearier,' said Legolas. 'There will  be no  escape again, if we  do not
contrive  it. How  that is to be done cannot  be guessed, but first we  must
overtake them.'
'And yet even I,  Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my
folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause ' said Gimli. 'My
heart burns me too, and I would  have  started sooner but now I must  rest a
little to run the  better. And if we  rest, then the blind night is the time
to do so.'
'I said that  it  was a  hard  choice,' said Aragorn. 'How shall we end
this debate?'
'You are our guide,' said Gimli, 'and you are skilled in the chase. You
shall choose.'
'My heart  bids me go on,'  said Legolas. 'But we must hold together. I
will follow your counsel.'
'You give the choice to an ill chooser,' said Aragorn. 'Since we passed
through the Argonath  my  choices have  gone amiss.' He  fell  silent gazing
north and west into the gathering night for a long while.
'We will  not walk in  the dark,'  he  said at length.  'The  peril  of
missing the trail  or  signs  of  other  coming and  going seems to  me  the
greater. If the  Moon gave enough  light, we would use it, but alas! he sets
early and is yet young and pale.'
'And  tonight he is shrouded anyway,' Gimli murmured.  'Would  that the
Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!'
'It will be more needed  where it is bestowed,' said Aragorn. 'With him
lies  the true Quest.  Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds of this
time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no  choice of mine can
mar or mend. Well, I have chosen. So let us use the time as best we may!'
He  cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he  had
not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir. Before dawn was
in the sky he woke and rose.  Gimli  was still deep in slumber,  but Legolas
was standing,  gazing northwards into the darkness, thoughtful and silent as
a young tree in a windless night.
'They are  far far away,' he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. 'I know in
my heart that they have not rested this night.  Only an eagle could overtake
them now.'
'Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,' said Aragorn. Stooping he
roused the Dwarf. 'Come! We must go,' he said. 'The scent is growing cold.'
'But it is still dark,' said Gimli. 'Even Legolas on a  hill-top  could
not see them till the Sun is up.'
'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon
or sun,' said Legolas.
'Where sight fails the earth may  bring us rumour,' said  Aragorn. 'The
land  must  groan under  their hated  feet.' He stretched  himself  upon the
ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay  there  motionless, for
so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again.
Dawn came glimmering, and  slowly a grey  light grew about them.  At last he
rose, and now his friends could see his face: it was pale and drawn, and his
look was troubled.
'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Nothing  walks
upon it for many miles about  us. Faint and far are the feet of our enemies.
But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them,
even  as  I lay on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams:  horses
galloping, passing  in the West. But now they are  drawing ever further from
us, riding northward. I wonder what is happening in this land!'
'Let us go!' said Legolas.
So the third day of their pursuit began. During  all its long  hours of
cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running, as if no
weariness could quench the  fire that burned them.  They seldom spoke.  Over
the  wide solitude they  passed  and their elven-cloaks  faded  against  the
background of the grey-green fields; even  in the cool  sunlight  of mid-day
few but elvish eyes would have marked them, until they  were close  at hand.
Often  in their  hearts  they thanked the Lady  of  Lurien for  the gift  of
lembas   , for they could eat of it and find new strength even as they ran.
All day the track of  their enemies led  straight  on, going north-west
without a break or turn. As once again the  day wore to its end they came to
long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards a line of low
humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter  as it bent north towards
them, for  the ground became harder  and the grass  shorter. Far away to the
left  the river Entwash wound, a silver thread in a green floor.  No  moving
thing could be seen. Often Aragorn wondered  that they saw no sign  of beast
or  man. The dwellings of the  Rohirrim were for the most  part many leagues
away to the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now
hidden
in mist and cloud;  yet  the Horse-lords  had formerly kept  many  herds and
studs  in  the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there the
herdsmen had wandered much, living  in  camp  and tent, even in winter-time.
