'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon
or sun,' said Legolas.
'Where sight fails the earth may  bring us rumour,' said  Aragorn. 'The
land  must  groan under  their hated  feet.' He stretched  himself  upon the
ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay  there  motionless, for
so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again.
Dawn came glimmering, and  slowly a grey  light grew about them.  At last he
rose, and now his friends could see his face: it was pale and drawn, and his
look was troubled.
'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Nothing  walks
upon it for many miles about  us. Faint and far are the feet of our enemies.
But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them,
even  as  I lay on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams:  horses
galloping, passing  in the West. But now they are  drawing ever further from
us, riding northward. I wonder what is happening in this land!'
'Let us go!' said Legolas.
So the third day of their pursuit began. During  all its long  hours of
cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running, as if no
weariness could quench the  fire that burned them.  They seldom spoke.  Over
the  wide solitude they  passed  and their elven-cloaks  faded  against  the
background of the grey-green fields; even  in the cool  sunlight  of mid-day
few but elvish eyes would have marked them, until they  were close  at hand.
Often  in their  hearts  they thanked the Lady  of  Lurien for  the gift  of
lembas   , for they could eat of it and find new strength even as they ran.
All day the track of  their enemies led  straight  on, going north-west
without a break or turn. As once again the  day wore to its end they came to
long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards a line of low
humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter  as it bent north towards
them, for  the ground became harder  and the grass  shorter. Far away to the
left  the river Entwash wound, a silver thread in a green floor.  No  moving
thing could be seen. Often Aragorn wondered  that they saw no sign  of beast
or  man. The dwellings of the  Rohirrim were for the most  part many leagues
away to the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now
hidden
in mist and cloud;  yet  the Horse-lords  had formerly kept  many  herds and
studs  in  the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there the
herdsmen had wandered much, living  in  camp  and tent, even in winter-time.
But now  all the land was empty, and there was silence  that did not seem to
be the quiet of peace.
At  dusk they halted  again. Now twice twelve  leagues  they had passed
over  the plains of Rohan  and  the wall of  the Emyn Muil was  lost in  the
shadows  of the East. The  young moon  was glimmering in a misty sky, but it
gave small light, and the stars were veiled.
'Now  do I most  grudge  a time of rest or any halt in our chase ' said
Legolas. 'The Orcs have run before us, as if  the very whips  of Sauron were
behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and the dark hills,
and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees.'
Gimli ground his  teeth. 'This  is a bitter end to our  hope and to all
our toil!' he said.
'To  hope, maybe, but  not to  toil,'  said Aragorn. 'We shall not turn
back here. Yet I am weary.' He gazed  back along the  way that they had come
towards the night gathering in the East. 'There is something strange at work
in this land.  I distrust the  silence. I  distrust even  the pale Moon. The
stars are  faint; and I am weary as I have  seldom been before,  weary as no
Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow. There is some will that lends
speed  to our foes and sets an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is
in the heart more than in the limb.'
'Truly!' said Legolas. 'That I have known since first we came down from
the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.' He pointed away
over the  land  of  Rohan  into  the darkling West  under  the sickle  moon.
'Saruman!'  muttered Aragorn. 'But he shall not turn  us back!  Halt we must
once more; for,  see! even the  Moon  is falling  into gathering  cloud. But
north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.'
As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever slept. 'Awake!
Awake!' he cried. 'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of
the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!'
The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly the
downs  drew near. It was still an hour before  noon when they  reached them:
green slopes rising to bare ridges  that ran in a line straight  towards the
North. At their feet the ground was dry and the turf short, but a long strip
of  sunken  land,  some  ten  miles  wide, lay  between them  and the  river
wandering deep in  dim  thickets of reed  and rush. Just to  the West of the
southernmost slope there was a great ring, where  the turf had been torn and
beaten by many trampling feet. From it  the orc-trail ran out again, turning
north along the  dry  skirts  of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined  the
tracks closely.
'They rested here a  while,' he said,  'but even the outward  trail  is
already  old. I  fear  that your  heart  spoke truly,  Legolas: it is thrice
twelve hours, I guess, since the Orcs stood where we now stand. If they held
to their pace,  then  at sundown  yesterday they would reach  the borders of
Fangorn.'
'I can see nothing  away north or west but  grass dwindling into mist,'
said Gimli. 'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?'
'It is  still  far  away,'  said Aragorn. 'If I remember rightly, these
downs run  eight leagues  or  more to the north, and then north-west to  the
issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land. another fifteen leagues
it may be.'
'Well, let  us go on,' said Gimli. 'My legs must forget the miles. They
would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.'
The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the  end of the line
of  downs.  For many  hours they had  marched without rest. They  were going
slowly now, and Gimli's back was bent.  Stone-hard are the Dwarves in labour
or journey, but this endless  chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed
in his heart. Aragorn walked behind  him, grim and silent,  stooping now and
again to scan some print or mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped
as  lightly as ever,  his feet hardly seeming to press the grass. leaving no
footprints  as he passed; but in  the waybread of the Elves he found all the
sustenance that he needed, and  he could sleep, if sleep it  could be called
by Men, resting his mind in the strange  paths of elvish dreams,  even as he
walked open-eyed in the light of this world.
'Let us go  up on to this green hill!' he said.  Wearily they  followed
him, climbing the long slope, until  they  came out upon the  top. It  was a
round hill smooth and  bare, standing by itself,  the  most northerly of the
downs. The sun sank  and  the  shadows of evening fell  like a curtain. They
were alone  in a grey formless world without mark or measure. Only  far away
north-west  there  was  a  deeper darkness  against  the  dying  light:  the
Mountains of Mist and the forest at their feet.
'Nothing can  we see to guide us here,' said Gimli. 'Well, now we  must
halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!'
'The wind is north from the snows,' said Aragorn.
'And ere morning  it will be in  the East,' said Legolas.  'But rest if
