north along the  dry  skirts  of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined  the
tracks closely.
'They rested here a  while,' he said,  'but even the outward  trail  is
already  old. I  fear  that your  heart  spoke truly,  Legolas: it is thrice
twelve hours, I guess, since the Orcs stood where we now stand. If they held
to their pace,  then  at sundown  yesterday they would reach  the borders of
Fangorn.'
'I can see nothing  away north or west but  grass dwindling into mist,'
said Gimli. 'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?'
'It is  still  far  away,'  said Aragorn. 'If I remember rightly, these
downs run  eight leagues  or  more to the north, and then north-west to  the
issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land. another fifteen leagues
it may be.'
'Well, let  us go on,' said Gimli. 'My legs must forget the miles. They
would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.'
The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the  end of the line
of  downs.  For many  hours they had  marched without rest. They  were going
slowly now, and Gimli's back was bent.  Stone-hard are the Dwarves in labour
or journey, but this endless  chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed
in his heart. Aragorn walked behind  him, grim and silent,  stooping now and
again to scan some print or mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped
as  lightly as ever,  his feet hardly seeming to press the grass. leaving no
footprints  as he passed; but in  the waybread of the Elves he found all the
sustenance that he needed, and  he could sleep, if sleep it  could be called
by Men, resting his mind in the strange  paths of elvish dreams,  even as he
walked open-eyed in the light of this world.
'Let us go  up on to this green hill!' he said.  Wearily they  followed
him, climbing the long slope, until  they  came out upon the  top. It  was a
round hill smooth and  bare, standing by itself,  the  most northerly of the
downs. The sun sank  and  the  shadows of evening fell  like a curtain. They
were alone  in a grey formless world without mark or measure. Only  far away
north-west  there  was  a  deeper darkness  against  the  dying  light:  the
Mountains of Mist and the forest at their feet.
'Nothing can  we see to guide us here,' said Gimli. 'Well, now we  must
halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!'
'The wind is north from the snows,' said Aragorn.
'And ere morning  it will be in  the East,' said Legolas.  'But rest if
you must. Yet  do  not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown.  Rede oft is
found at the rising of the Sun.'
'Three  suns already have risen on  our  chase and brought no counsel '
said Gimli.
The  night  grew  ever  colder.  Aragorn  and Gimli slept fitfully, and
whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or walking to
and
fro, singing softly to  himself in his own tongue, and as  he sang the white
stars  opened in  the hard black vault above. So the  night passed. Together
they watched the dawn grow slowly in the  sky, now bare and cloudless, until
at  last the sunrise came. It was pale and clear. The  wind was  in the East
and  all the mists had rolled away;  wide lands lay bleak about them in  the
bitter light.
Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that
they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great River. North-
westward
stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten leagues away stood its shadowy
eaves, and its  further  slopes  faded into  the distant blue. Beyond  there
glimmered far away, as if floating  on a  grey cloud, the white head of tall
Methedras, the  last  peak  of  the  Misty Mountains. Out of  the forest the
Entwash flowed to meet them, its  stream now swift and narrow, and its banks
deep-cloven. The orc-trail turned from the downs towards it.
Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the river
back towards the forest,  Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant green,  a dark
swift-moving  blur.  He cast  himself upon  the  ground  and  listened again
intently.  But Legolas stood beside him, shading  his bright elven-eyes with
his long slender hand, and he saw not a  shadow, nor  a blur, but the  small
figures  of horsemen, many horsemen, and the glint of morning on the tips of
their spears was  like the twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal
sight. Far behind them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads.
There was a silence  in the empty fields, arid Gimli could hear the air
moving in the grass.
'Riders!' cried Aragorn, springing to  his feet.  'Many riders on swift
steeds are coming towards us!'
'Yes,' said Legolas, 'there are one hundred  and five. Yellow is  their
hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.'
Aragorn smiled. 'Keen are the eyes of the Elves,' he said.
'Nay!  The  riders are little  more  than  five leagues distant,'  said
Legolas.
'Five leagues or  one,' said Gimli; 'we cannot escape them in this bare
land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?'
'We will wait,' said Aragorn. 'I  am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or
at least  others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back down the
orc-trail. We may get new s from them.'
'Or spears,' said Gimli.
'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,' said Legolas.
'I did not say that we should hear good news,' said  Aragorn. 'But evil
or good we will await it here.'
The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy
mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the northward  slope.
A little  above the hill's foot they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about
them, they sat huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed slowly
and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy.
'What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?' he said. 'Do we sit here
waiting for sudden death?'
'I have been among them,' answered Aragorn. 'They are proud and wilful,
but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel;
wise but unlearned,  writing no books  but  singing many  songs,  after  the
manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not know  what
has happened here of late, nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now  be between
the traitor  Saruman and the threat of  Sauron.  They  have  long  been  the
friends of the people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in
forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of  the North,
and  their  kinship  is rather  with  the  Bardings  of  Dale, and with  the
Beornings of the Wood,  among whom may still be seen many men tall and
fair,
as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will not love the Orcs.'
'But Gandalf spoke of a  rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor '  said
Gimli.
'I believe it no more than did Boromir,' answered Aragorn.
'You will soon learn the truth,' said Legolas. 'Already they approach.'
At length even Gimli could  hear the distant  beat of  galloping hoofs.
The horsemen,  following  the trail, had  turned  from the  river,  and were
drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind.
