without need. And  he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so
little hurt from the evil,  and escaped  in  the  end, because he began  his
ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.'
'I am sorry,' said  Frodo.  'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any
pity for Gollum.'
'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in.
'No,  and I don't  want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you
mean to  say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on  after all  those
horrible  deeds? Now at any rate he is  as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy.
He deserves death.'
'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager  to
deal out death in judgement.  For  even the very wise cannot see all ends. I
have not much hope  that Gollum can be cured before  he dies, but there is a
chance of it. And  he is bound  up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells
me that  he  has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and
when that comes, the pity  of Bilbo may  rule the fate  of many -  yours not
least. In any case we did  not kill him:  he is very old  and very wretched.
The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such  kindness as
they can find in their wise hearts.'
'All the same,' said Frodo,  'even if  Bilbo could  not kill  Gollum, I
wish he had not kept the  Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had
not got it!  Why  did  you  let me keep it? Why didn't you make me  throw it
away, or, or destroy it?'
'Let you? Make you?' said the  wizard.  'Haven't you been  listening to
all  that I  have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying.  But as
for throwing  it away,  that was  obviously wrong. These Rings have a way of
being  found. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst  of all, it
might have fallen into the  hands of the Enemy. Indeed  it certainly  would;
for this is the One, and  he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it
to himself.
'Of  course, my  dear  Frodo,  it  was dangerous  for you; and that has
troubled me deeply. But there  was so  much at stake that I had to take some
risk  - though even when  I was far away there has never been a day when the
Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I
did not think  that the Ring would have  any lasting effect on  you, not for
evil,  not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine
years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew little for certain.'
'But  why  not destroy  it, as you say should have been done long ago?'
cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even  sent me a message, I would
have done away with it.'
'Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?'
'No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.'
'Try!' said Gandalf. Try now!'
Frodo drew the Ring  out of his pocket again and looked  at it. It  now
appeared  plain and smooth, without  mark or device that  he  could see. The
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was
its  colour,  how perfect was  its  roundness. It was an admirable thing and
altogether  precious. When he  took  it out he had intended to fling it from
him into the very hottest  part of the  fire. But he found now that he could
not do so, not without a great  struggle. He weighed the  Ring in his  hand,
hesitating,  and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told  him;
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast  it away -
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket.
Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily
let  it  go,  nor will to damage it. And I  could not "make" you - except by
force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking  the Ring, force  is
useless. Even if you took it and struck it  with a  heavy sledge-hammer,  it
would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine.
'Your small  fire, of course, would  not melt even ordinary  gold. This
Ring has already passed through it unscathed,  and even unheated.  But there
is  no smith's forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not even the
anvils and furnaces  of  the Dwarves could do that.  It has been  said  that
dragon-fire could melt and consume the Rings  of Power, but there is not now
any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was  there
ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the
One
Ring,  the Ruling Ring, for  that was  made by Sauron himself. There is only
one  way:  to  find  the  Cracks  of Doom in  the  depths  of Orodruin,  the
Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it,
to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for ever.'
'I do  really wish to destroy it!'  cried Frodo. 'Or,  well, to have it
destroyed. I am not  made for perilous  quests. I wish  I had never seen the
Ring! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?'
'Such questions cannot be  answered,'  said Gandalf.  'You may be  sure
that it was not  for any merit that others do not possess: not for  power or
wisdom,  at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you  must therefore  use
such strength and heart and wits as you have.'
'But I  have so  little of any  of  these  things!  You  are  wise  and
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?'
'No!' cried Gandalf, springing  to  his feet. 'With that power I should
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring  would  gain a power
still greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face  was lit as by
a fire within. 'Do not tempt me! For I do not  wish to become like the  Dark
Lord  himself. Yet the  way of the  Ring  to  my heart is by pity, pity  for
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do  not tempt me! I dare not
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too
great, for my  strength.  I shall  have  such  need of it. Great  perils lie
before me.'
He  went to the  window and drew aside the curtains  and the  shutters.
Sunlight  streamed  back again into  the  room. Sam  passed  along the  path
outside whistling. 'And now,'  said  the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the
decision lies with you. But  I will always  help you.' He  laid his hand  on
Frodo's shoulder. 'I will help you bear this  burden, as long as It is yours
to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.'
There was a long  silence.  Gandalf  sat down again and puffed  at  his
pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes  seemed closed, but under the  lids he
was watching Frodo  intently. Frodo  gazed fixedly at the red embers on  the
hearth,  until they filled all his vision,  and he seemed to be looking down
into  profound  wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled  Cracks of Doom
and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.
'Well!'  said Gandalf at last.  'What are you  thinking about? Have you
decided what to do?'
'No!'  answered Frodo,  coming back to himself  out  of  darkness,  and
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the  window he
could see the sunlit garden.  'Or perhaps, yes.  As far as I understand what
you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the
present, whatever it may do to me.'
'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with
that purpose,' said Gandalf.
'I hope so,'  said Frodo.  'But I  hope  that  you may  find some other
