'Nay!  The  riders are little  more  than  five leagues distant,'  said
Legolas.
'Five leagues or  one,' said Gimli; 'we cannot escape them in this bare
land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?'
'We will wait,' said Aragorn. 'I  am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or
at least  others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back down the
orc-trail. We may get new s from them.'
'Or spears,' said Gimli.
'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,' said Legolas.
'I did not say that we should hear good news,' said  Aragorn. 'But evil
or good we will await it here.'
The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy
mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the northward  slope.
A little  above the hill's foot they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about
them, they sat huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed slowly
and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy.
'What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?' he said. 'Do we sit here
waiting for sudden death?'
'I have been among them,' answered Aragorn. 'They are proud and wilful,
but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel;
wise but unlearned,  writing no books  but  singing many  songs,  after  the
manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not know  what
has happened here of late, nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now  be between
the traitor  Saruman and the threat of  Sauron.  They  have  long  been  the
friends of the people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in
forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of  the North,
and  their  kinship  is rather  with  the  Bardings  of  Dale, and with  the
Beornings of the Wood,  among whom may still be seen many men tall and
fair,
as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will not love the Orcs.'
'But Gandalf spoke of a  rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor '  said
Gimli.
'I believe it no more than did Boromir,' answered Aragorn.
'You will soon learn the truth,' said Legolas. 'Already they approach.'
At length even Gimli could  hear the distant  beat of  galloping hoofs.
The horsemen,  following  the trail, had  turned  from the  river,  and were
drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind.
Now the  cries  of clear strong voices  came ringing over  the  fields.
Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and  the foremost horseman
swerved, passing by  the  foot  of the  hill,  and  leading  the  host  back
southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him they rode: a long
line of mail-clad men. swift, shining, fell and fair to look upon.
Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their grey
coats  glistened, their  long tails flowed  in the  wind, their  manes  were
braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched them well: tall
and long-limbed; their hair, flaxen-pale,  flowed under  their  light helms,
and streamed in long braids behind them; their faces were stern and keen. In
their  hands were tall  spears of ash,  painted  shields were slung at their
backs, long swords were at their belts, their burnished skirts of  mail hung
down upon their knees.
In pairs  they galloped  by, and though every now  and then one rose in
his  stirrups  and  gazed ahead  and to  either side, they appeared  not  to
perceive  the three strangers sitting silently and  watching them. The  host
had almost passed  when  suddenly Aragorn  stood  up, and  called in a  loud
voice:
'What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?'
With astonishing speed and  skill they  checked  their steeds, wheeled,
and came charging round.  Soon the three companions  found  themselves  in a
ring of horsemen  moving in a running circle, up the hill-slope  behind them
and down,  round and round  them, and  drawing  ever inwards. Aragorn  stood
silent, and  the other two  sat  without  moving, wondering what  way things
would turn.
Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of spears
were  pointed towards the strangers; and some  of the  horsemen had bows  in
hand, and their  arrows were  already fitted  to the  string. Then one  rode
forward, a tall man, taller than  all the rest; from  his helm as a crest  a
white horsetail flowed. He advanced  until the point of his spear was within
a foot of Aragorn's breast. Aragorn did not stir.
'Who are  you,  and what are you doing  in this  land?' said the Rider,
using the  Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like  to the speech
of Boromir, Man of Gondor.
'I am called Strider,' answered Aragorn. 'I came out of the North. I am
hunting Orcs.'
The Rider leaped from  his horse. Giving his spear to another  who rode
up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood face to face with
Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not  without wonder. At  length  he spoke
again.
'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,' he said; 'but now I
see that it is  not so. Indeed  you know  little of Orcs, if  you go hunting
them  in this  fashion.  They were swift and well-armed, and they were many.
You would have changed from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them.
But there is something strange about you, Strider.' He bent his clear bright
eyes again upon the Ranger. 'That  is  no name for a Man that  you give. And
strange too is your raiment.  Have you sprung out of the  grass? How did you
escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?'
'No,'  said  Aragorn.  'One  only of us  is an  Elf, Legolas  from  the
Woodland Realm in  distant Mirkwood. But we have  passed through
Lothlurien,
and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.'
The Rider looked at them  with  renewed wonder, but  his eyes hardened.
'Then there  is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!' he said. 'Few
escape  her  nets, they  say. These are  strange days! But if  you  have her
favour, then you  also are  net-weavers and  sorcerers,  maybe.' He turned a
cold glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli.  'Why do you  not speak, silent
ones?' he demanded.
Gimli  rose and  planted  his feet  firmly apart: his hand gripped  the
handle  of  his  axe,  and  his  dark  eyes flashed.  'Give  me  your  name,
horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,' he said.
'As for that,' said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, 'the stranger
should declare  himself first. Yet I am named  Jomer  son of Jomund,  and am
called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.'
'Then Jomer son  of Jomund,  Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the
Dwarf  Gluin's son warn you against foolish  words.  You speak evil of  that
which is fair  beyond the  reach  of your  thought, and only little  wit can
excuse you.'
Jomer's eyes  blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed
in, advancing  their  spears. 'I  would cut  off your  head, beard and  all,
Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground ' said Jomer.
'He stands not  alone,'  said Legolas,  bending his bow and fitting  an
arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 'You would  die before  your
stroke fell.'
