up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood face to face with
Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not  without wonder. At  length  he spoke
again.
'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,' he said; 'but now I
see that it is  not so. Indeed  you know  little of Orcs, if  you go hunting
them  in this  fashion.  They were swift and well-armed, and they were many.
You would have changed from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them.
But there is something strange about you, Strider.' He bent his clear bright
eyes again upon the Ranger. 'That  is  no name for a Man that  you give. And
strange too is your raiment.  Have you sprung out of the  grass? How did you
escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?'
'No,'  said  Aragorn.  'One  only of us  is an  Elf, Legolas  from  the
Woodland Realm in  distant Mirkwood. But we have  passed through
Lothlurien,
and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.'
The Rider looked at them  with  renewed wonder, but  his eyes hardened.
'Then there  is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!' he said. 'Few
escape  her  nets, they  say. These are  strange days! But if  you  have her
favour, then you  also are  net-weavers and  sorcerers,  maybe.' He turned a
cold glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli.  'Why do you  not speak, silent
ones?' he demanded.
Gimli  rose and  planted  his feet  firmly apart: his hand gripped  the
handle  of  his  axe,  and  his  dark  eyes flashed.  'Give  me  your  name,
horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,' he said.
'As for that,' said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, 'the stranger
should declare  himself first. Yet I am named  Jomer  son of Jomund,  and am
called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.'
'Then Jomer son  of Jomund,  Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the
Dwarf  Gluin's son warn you against foolish  words.  You speak evil of  that
which is fair  beyond the  reach  of your  thought, and only little  wit can
excuse you.'
Jomer's eyes  blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed
in, advancing  their  spears. 'I  would cut  off your  head, beard and  all,
Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground ' said Jomer.
'He stands not  alone,'  said Legolas,  bending his bow and fitting  an
arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 'You would  die before  your
stroke fell.'
Jomer  raised  his sword, and things might  have  gone ill, but Aragorn
sprang  between them, and raised his hand. 'Your pardon,  Jomer!' he  cried.
'When you know more you will understand why  you have angered my
companions.
We intend no  evil to Rohan,  nor to any of its folk, neither to man  nor to
horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?'
'I  will,'  said  Jomer  lowering  his  blade. 'But  wanderers  in  the
Riddermark  would be  wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt.  First
tell me your right name.'
'First tell me whom you serve,' said Aragorn. 'Are you friend or foe of
Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?'
'I serve only the Lord  of the  Mark, Thjoden  King  son  of  Thengel,'
answered Jomer. 'We do  not serve the Power of the Black Land far away,  but
neither are we yet at open war with him; and  if you  are fleeing  from him,
then you had best leave this  land. There is trouble now on all our borders,
and we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live as we have
lived, keeping  our  own, and  serving  no  foreign  lord,  good or evil. We
welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in  these  times the unbidden
stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you?  Whom do                        you  serve?
At
whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land?'
'I serve no man,' said  Aragorn;  'but the servants of  Sauron I pursue
into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men who know
more
of Orcs; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out of choice. The Orcs whom
we pursued  took captive two of my friends. In such need a man  that  has no
horse  will go on foot, and he will  not ask for leave to  follow the trail.
Nor will  he  count  the heads  of  the enemy save  with a  sword.  I am not
weaponless.'
Aragorn  threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he grasped
it, and the bright blade of And®ril shone like a sudden flame as he swept it
out.  'Elendil!'  he cried. 'I  am  Aragorn son  of Arathorn and  am  called
Elessar, the Elfstone, D®nadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor.
Here is the Sword  that was  Broken and is forged again! Will you aid  me or
thwart me? Choose swiftly!'
Gimli  and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for they had
not seen him  in this  mood before. He seemed to have grown in stature while
Jomer had shrunk; and in his  living face they caught a brief vision of  the
power and majesty of the  kings of stone. For a moment it seemed to the eyes
of Legolas  that a white flame  flickered  on the  brows  of Aragorn  like a
shining crown.
Jomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast down  his
proud  eyes.  'These  are  indeed  strange days,'  he  muttered. 'Dreams and
legends spring to life out of the grass.
'Tell  me,  lord,' he said,  'what  brings you  here?  And what was the
meaning  of the dark  words?  Long  has  Boromir  son of Denethor  been gone
seeking an answer, and the horse that we lent him  came back riderless. What
doom do you bring out of the North?'
'The doom of choice,' said Aragorn. 'You may say this to Thjoden son of
Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him. None may live
now as they have lived, and few  shall keep what they call their own. But of
these  great  matters we  will speak  later. If  chance allows, I will  come
myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for help,  or at least
for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our
friends. What can you tell us?'
'That  you  need not  pursue  them further,' said Jomer. 'The  Orcs are
destroyed.'
'And our friends?'
'We found none but Orcs.'
'But that is strange indeed,' said Aragorn. 'Did you search the  slain?
Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would be small. Only
children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.'
'There  were no dwarves  nor children,' said Jomer. 'We counted all the
slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as
is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.'
'We do not speak of dwarves or children,' said Gimli. 'Our friends were
hobbits.'
'Hobbits?' said Jomer. 'And what may they be? It is a strange name.'
'A strange name  for a strange folk,' said Gimli. 'But these were  very
dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled
Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.'
'Halflings!' laughed the Rider that stood beside Jomer. 'Halflings! But
they are  only  a little people in old songs and children's tales out of the
North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?'
