Jomer had shrunk; and in his  living face they caught a brief vision of  the
power and majesty of the  kings of stone. For a moment it seemed to the eyes
of Legolas  that a white flame  flickered  on the  brows  of Aragorn  like a
shining crown.
Jomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast down  his
proud  eyes.  'These  are  indeed  strange days,'  he  muttered. 'Dreams and
legends spring to life out of the grass.
'Tell  me,  lord,' he said,  'what  brings you  here?  And what was the
meaning  of the dark  words?  Long  has  Boromir  son of Denethor  been gone
seeking an answer, and the horse that we lent him  came back riderless. What
doom do you bring out of the North?'
'The doom of choice,' said Aragorn. 'You may say this to Thjoden son of
Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him. None may live
now as they have lived, and few  shall keep what they call their own. But of
these  great  matters we  will speak  later. If  chance allows, I will  come
myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for help,  or at least
for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our
friends. What can you tell us?'
'That  you  need not  pursue  them further,' said Jomer. 'The  Orcs are
destroyed.'
'And our friends?'
'We found none but Orcs.'
'But that is strange indeed,' said Aragorn. 'Did you search the  slain?
Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would be small. Only
children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.'
'There  were no dwarves  nor children,' said Jomer. 'We counted all the
slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as
is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.'
'We do not speak of dwarves or children,' said Gimli. 'Our friends were
hobbits.'
'Hobbits?' said Jomer. 'And what may they be? It is a strange name.'
'A strange name  for a strange folk,' said Gimli. 'But these were  very
dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled
Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.'
'Halflings!' laughed the Rider that stood beside Jomer. 'Halflings! But
they are  only  a little people in old songs and children's tales out of the
North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?'
'A man may do both,' said Aragorn. 'For not we but those who come after
will make the  legends  of  our time. The green earth, say you?  That  is  a
mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under the light of day!'
'Time is  pressing,'  said the  Rider, not  heeding  Aragorn. 'We  must
hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or let us
bind them and take them to the king.'
'Peace, Jothain!' said Jomer in his own tongue. 'Leave me a while. Tell
the  jored   to assemble on the path' and make ready to ride to the Entwade.'
Muttering Jothain retired, and spoke to  the others. Soon they drew off
and left Jomer alone with the three companions.
'All  that you say  is strange,  Aragorn.' he said. 'Yet you speak  the
truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore they are
not easily deceived. But you have not told  all. Will you not now speak more
fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to do?'
'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,'
answered Aragorn. 'With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith. My errand was to
go
to that city with the son of Denethor,  to aid his folk in their war against
Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed with had other  business. Of that I
cannot speak now. Gandalf the Grey was our leader.'
'Gandalf!' Jomer exclaimed. 'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but
his name, I warn  you, is no longer a password to the king's favour.  He has
been a guest in the land many times in the memory of men, coming as he will,
after  a season,  or  after  many  years. He is  ever the  herald of strange
events: a bringer of evil, some now say.
'Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss.
At that  time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we counted  Saruman
our  friend,  hut Gandalf  came  then  and  warned us that  sudden  war  was
preparing  in  Isengard.  He  said that  he himself had  been  a prisoner in
Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and  he  begged  for help. But Thjoden would
not listen to him, and he went away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in
Thjoden's ears! He is  wroth.  For  Gandalf took  the  horse  that is called
Shadowfax, the most precious of all the king's steeds, chief  of the                  Mearas   ,
which only the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the
great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven  nights ago Shadowfax
returned; but  the king's  anger is not less, for  now the horse is wild and
will let no man handle him.'
'Then  Shadowfax  has found  his  way alone from  the far North,'  said
Aragorn; 'for  it  was there that he and Gandalf  parted. But  alas! Gandalf
will  ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines  of Moria and comes
not again.'
'That  is heavy  tidings,'  said Jomer.  'At least to  me, and to many;
though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.'
'It  is  tidings more grievous than any in  this  land can  understand,
though it may touch them  sorely  ere the year is much older,' said Aragorn.
'But when  the great fall, the less must lead. My  part it has been to guide
our Company on the long  road from Moria. Through Lurien we came -- of
which
it were well that you should learn  the truth  ere you speak of it  again --
and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There
Boromir was slain by the same Orcs whom you destroyed.'
'Your  news is all of woe!' cried Jomer in dismay. 'Great harm is  this
death to  Minas  Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his
praise.  He  came  seldom to the Mark, for he  was ever  in the wars on  the
East-borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl  than
to the  grave Men  of Gondor  he seemed  to me, and likely to  prove a great
captain of  his  people when  his time came. But we have had no word of this
grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?'
'It is now the fourth day since he was slain,' answered  Aragorn,  'and
since the evening of  that day  we  have  journeyed from the shadow  of  Tol
Brandir.'
'On foot?' cried Jomer.
'Yes, even as you see us.'
Wide wonder came into Jomer's eyes. 'Strider is too poor a name, son of
Arathorn,' he  said. 'Wingfoot I name  you.  This deed of the  three friends
should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and five  you have measured ere
the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of Elendil!
'But  now, lord, what would you  have me do! I must return in  haste to
Thjoden. I spoke warily  before  my  men. It is true that  we are not yet at
open  war with the Black Land, and there are some, close to the  king's ear,
that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall  not forsake our old
alliance  with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say  I and
all  who  hold  with me. The East-mark is my charge. the ward  of  the Third
Marshal, and I have  removed  all our  herds  and herdfolk, withdrawing them
