'Then  Shadowfax  has found  his  way alone from  the far North,'  said
Aragorn; 'for  it  was there that he and Gandalf  parted. But  alas! Gandalf
will  ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines  of Moria and comes
not again.'
'That  is heavy  tidings,'  said Jomer.  'At least to  me, and to many;
though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.'
'It  is  tidings more grievous than any in  this  land can  understand,
though it may touch them  sorely  ere the year is much older,' said Aragorn.
'But when  the great fall, the less must lead. My  part it has been to guide
our Company on the long  road from Moria. Through Lurien we came -- of
which
it were well that you should learn  the truth  ere you speak of it  again --
and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There
Boromir was slain by the same Orcs whom you destroyed.'
'Your  news is all of woe!' cried Jomer in dismay. 'Great harm is  this
death to  Minas  Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his
praise.  He  came  seldom to the Mark, for he  was ever  in the wars on  the
East-borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl  than
to the  grave Men  of Gondor  he seemed  to me, and likely to  prove a great
captain of  his  people when  his time came. But we have had no word of this
grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?'
'It is now the fourth day since he was slain,' answered  Aragorn,  'and
since the evening of  that day  we  have  journeyed from the shadow  of  Tol
Brandir.'
'On foot?' cried Jomer.
'Yes, even as you see us.'
Wide wonder came into Jomer's eyes. 'Strider is too poor a name, son of
Arathorn,' he  said. 'Wingfoot I name  you.  This deed of the  three friends
should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and five  you have measured ere
the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of Elendil!
'But  now, lord, what would you  have me do! I must return in  haste to
Thjoden. I spoke warily  before  my  men. It is true that  we are not yet at
open  war with the Black Land, and there are some, close to the  king's ear,
that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall  not forsake our old
alliance  with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say  I and
all  who  hold  with me. The East-mark is my charge. the ward  of  the Third
Marshal, and I have  removed  all our  herds  and herdfolk, withdrawing them
beyond Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.'
'Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?' said Gimli.
'We do not and we never have.'  said Jomer  with  a flash  of his eyes;
'though it comes to my  ears that that lie has been told. Some years ago the
Lord of the Black Land wished to  purchase horses of us at  great price, but
we  refused him.  for he puts  beasts  to evil use. Then he sent  plundering
Orcs, and  they carry  off what they can, choosing always the  black horses:
few of these are now left. For that reason our feud with the Orcs is bitter.
'But at this  time our chief concern  is  with Saruman. He has  claimed
lordship over  all this  land,  and there  has been war  between us for many
months.  He has taken Orcs into his service,  and Wolf-riders, and evil Men,
and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are likely to be beset both
east and west.
'It is ill dealing with such a  foe:  he  is a wizard both cunning  and
dwimmer-crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they say, as an
old  man hooded and cloaked, very like  to Gandalf, as many now recall.  His
spies  slip  through every net, and his birds  of ill omen are abroad in the
sky. I do not  know how it will all end, and  my heart  misgives me;  for it
seems to  me that his friends do not all dwell in Isengard. But  if you come
to the king's  house, you shall see for  yourself. Will  you not come? Do  I
hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?'
'I will come when I may,' said Aragorn.
'Come now!' said Jomer. 'The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed
to the  Sons of Eorl  in this evil tide.  There is battle even  now upon the
Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us.
'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king's leave, for in my
absence his  house  is left with little guard. But scouts warned me  of  the
orc-host coming down out of the East  Wall  three nights ago, and among them
they reported that some bore the white badges of Saruman. So suspecting what
I  most fear, a league between  Orthanc  and  the Dark Tower, I led forth my
jored  ,  men of  my own household; and  we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two
days  ago, near to the borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and
gave battle yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men  I lost, and  twelve horses
alas! For the  Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others joined
them. coming out of the East across the Great River: their trail is plain to
see a little north of this spot.  And  others, too, came out  of the forest.
Great Orcs, who  also bore the White Hand of Isengard: that kind is stronger
and more fell than all others.
'Nonetheless we put an end to them.  But we have been too long away. We
are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are  spare horses as you
see. There is work for  the  Sword to do.  Yes, and we could find a  use for
Gimli's axe  and the bow of Legolas, if  they  will  pardon  my  rash  words
concerning  the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and
I would gladly learn better.'
'I thank you for your fair words,' said Aragorn, 'and  my heart desires
to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope remains.'
'Hope does not remain,'  said Jomer. 'You will not find your friends on
the North-borders.'
'Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the
East Wall that one  at least of  them was still alive there. But between the
wall and the downs  we  have found no  other trace of them, and no trail has
turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.'
'Then what do you think has become of them?'
'I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the Orcs; but
that you  will say  cannot be, and I do not fear it. I  can only think  that
they were  carried off into the forest before the  battle,  even  before you
encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such
a way?'
'I would swear that no Orc  escaped after we sighted them,' said Jomer.
'We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that any living thing
broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.'
'Our  friends  were  attired  even as we  are,' said Aragorn; 'and  you
passed us by under the full light of day.'
'I had forgotten that,' said Jomer. 'It is  hard to be sure of anything
among  so many  marvels. The  world is  all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf  in
company walk in our daily  fields; and folk speak with the  Lady of the Wood
and yet live; and the Sword comes  back to war  that was broken in  the long
ages  ere  the  fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark!  How  shall a man
judge what to do in such times?'
'As he ever has judged,' said Aragorn.  'Good and  ill have not changed
since  yesteryear;  nor  are  they one thing among  Elves and  Dwarves µ and
another among Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden
Wood as in his own house.'
'True indeed,' said Jomer. 'But I do not doubt you, nor the  deed which
