and more fell than all others.
'Nonetheless we put an end to them.  But we have been too long away. We
are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are  spare horses as you
see. There is work for  the  Sword to do.  Yes, and we could find a  use for
Gimli's axe  and the bow of Legolas, if  they  will  pardon  my  rash  words
concerning  the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and
I would gladly learn better.'
'I thank you for your fair words,' said Aragorn, 'and  my heart desires
to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope remains.'
'Hope does not remain,'  said Jomer. 'You will not find your friends on
the North-borders.'
'Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the
East Wall that one  at least of  them was still alive there. But between the
wall and the downs  we  have found no  other trace of them, and no trail has
turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.'
'Then what do you think has become of them?'
'I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the Orcs; but
that you  will say  cannot be, and I do not fear it. I  can only think  that
they were  carried off into the forest before the  battle,  even  before you
encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such
a way?'
'I would swear that no Orc  escaped after we sighted them,' said Jomer.
'We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that any living thing
broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.'
'Our  friends  were  attired  even as we  are,' said Aragorn; 'and  you
passed us by under the full light of day.'
'I had forgotten that,' said Jomer. 'It is  hard to be sure of anything
among  so many  marvels. The  world is  all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf  in
company walk in our daily  fields; and folk speak with the  Lady of the Wood
and yet live; and the Sword comes  back to war  that was broken in  the long
ages  ere  the  fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark!  How  shall a man
judge what to do in such times?'
'As he ever has judged,' said Aragorn.  'Good and  ill have not changed
since  yesteryear;  nor  are  they one thing among  Elves and  Dwarves µ and
another among Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden
Wood as in his own house.'
'True indeed,' said Jomer. 'But I do not doubt you, nor the  deed which
my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our
law to let strangers wander  at  will  in our land, until the  king  himself
shall  give them leave,  and  more strict is  the command in  these days  of
peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with  me, and you will  not.
Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.'
'I do not  think your law was  made  for such a chance,' said  Aragorn.
'Nor  indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more than
once,  and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under other name and
in other guise. You  I have  not seen before,  for you are young, but I have
spoken with Jomund your father, and with Thjoden  son  of Thengel.  Never in
former days  would  any high lord of  this land  have  constrained a man  to
abandon such a quest as mine. My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now,
son of Jomund, the choice must be made at last. Aid us,  or at the worst let
us go free. Or seek to carry  out your law. If you do so there will be fewer
to return to your war or to your king.'
Jomer was silent for a  moment,  then he  spoke. 'We both have need  of
haste,' he said. 'My  company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your
hope. This  is my choice.  You  may go;  and  what  is more, I will lend you
horses. This  only I ask: when  your quest is achieved, or  is  proved vain,
return  with  the horses over the  Entwade  to Meduseld,  the high house  in
Edoras  where Thjoden now sits. Thus you shall prove to him that I  have not
misjudged. In this I place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of
your good faith. Do not fail.'
'I will not,' said Aragorn.
There  was great wonder, and many dark  and doubtful glances, among his
men, when Jomer gave orders that  the  spare horses were to be  lent to  the
strangers; but only Jothain dared to speak openly.
'It  may be  well enough  for this lord  of the race of Gondor,  as  he
claims,' he said, 'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a
Dwarf?'
'No one,' said Gimli. 'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it.
I would sooner  walk  than sit  on the back  of any beast so great,  free or
begrudged.'
'But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,' said Aragorn.
'Come, you shall sit  behind me, friend  Gimli, said Legolas.  Then all
will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled by one.'
A great dark-grey horse  was  brought to  Aragorn, and  he  mounted it.
'Hasufel is  his name,'  said  Jomer.  'May he bear  you well and to  better
fortune than Gbrulf, his late master!'
A  smaller and lighter  horse, but  restive and fiery,  was brought  to
Legolas. Arod was his  name.  But Legolas asked them to take  off saddle and
rein. 'I need them not,' he said, and leaped lightly up, and to their wonder
Arod was  tame and willing  beneath  him, moving  here and there  with but a
spoken word: such was the elvish way with all good beasts.  Gimli was lifted
up behind  his friend. and  he clung to him, not much more at ease than  Sam
Gamgee in a boat.
'Farewell, and may you find what  you  seek!' cried Jomer. 'Return with
what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!'
'I will come,' said Aragorn.
'And I will come, too,' said Gimli. 'The matter  of the  Lady Galadriel
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. '
'We  shall see,' said Jomer. 'So many strange things  have chanced that
to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a Dwarf's axe
will seem no great wonder. Farewell!'
With that they parted.  Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When after
a little Gimli looked back, the company of Jomer were  already small and far
away. Aragorn did not look  back: he was watching the  trail as they sped on
their way, bending low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long
they came to the  borders of the Entwash, and there they met the other trail
of which Jomer had spoken, coming down from the East out of the Wold.
Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then  leaping back into the
saddle, he rode  away for  some distance  eastward, keeping to one side  and
taking care not  to override  the footprints. Then he again  dismounted  and
examined the ground, going backwards and forwards on foot.
'There  is  little  to  discover,'  he said when he returned. 'The main
trail is all confused with the passage of  the  horsemen  as they came back;
their outward  course  must have lain nearer  the river. But  this  eastward
trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet going the other
way, back towards  Anduin. Now  we  must ride slower, and make sure  that no
trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Orcs must have been aware
from this point that they were  pursued; they may have made some  attempt to
get their captives away before they were overtaken.'
As they rode forward the  day  was overcast.  Low grey clouds came over
the  Wold.  A  mist  shrouded the sun. Ever nearer  the  tree-clad slopes of
