'Hasufel is  his name,'  said  Jomer.  'May he bear  you well and to  better
fortune than Gbrulf, his late master!'
A  smaller and lighter  horse, but  restive and fiery,  was brought  to
Legolas. Arod was his  name.  But Legolas asked them to take  off saddle and
rein. 'I need them not,' he said, and leaped lightly up, and to their wonder
Arod was  tame and willing  beneath  him, moving  here and there  with but a
spoken word: such was the elvish way with all good beasts.  Gimli was lifted
up behind  his friend. and  he clung to him, not much more at ease than  Sam
Gamgee in a boat.
'Farewell, and may you find what  you  seek!' cried Jomer. 'Return with
what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!'
'I will come,' said Aragorn.
'And I will come, too,' said Gimli. 'The matter  of the  Lady Galadriel
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. '
'We  shall see,' said Jomer. 'So many strange things  have chanced that
to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a Dwarf's axe
will seem no great wonder. Farewell!'
With that they parted.  Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When after
a little Gimli looked back, the company of Jomer were  already small and far
away. Aragorn did not look  back: he was watching the  trail as they sped on
their way, bending low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long
they came to the  borders of the Entwash, and there they met the other trail
of which Jomer had spoken, coming down from the East out of the Wold.
Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then  leaping back into the
saddle, he rode  away for  some distance  eastward, keeping to one side  and
taking care not  to override  the footprints. Then he again  dismounted  and
examined the ground, going backwards and forwards on foot.
'There  is  little  to  discover,'  he said when he returned. 'The main
trail is all confused with the passage of  the  horsemen  as they came back;
their outward  course  must have lain nearer  the river. But  this  eastward
trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet going the other
way, back towards  Anduin. Now  we  must ride slower, and make sure  that no
trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Orcs must have been aware
from this point that they were  pursued; they may have made some  attempt to
get their captives away before they were overtaken.'
As they rode forward the  day  was overcast.  Low grey clouds came over
the  Wold.  A  mist  shrouded the sun. Ever nearer  the  tree-clad slopes of
Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun  went west. They  saw no  sign of
any  trail to  right or  left, but here  and  there they passed single Orcs,
fallen in  their tracks as they  ran, with grey-feathered arrows sticking in
back or throat.
At  last  as the  afternoon was  waning they came  to  the eaves of the
forest, and in  an open  glade among the first trees they found the place of
the great burning:  the ashes were  still hot  and smoking. Beside it was  a
great pile of  helms and mail, cloven shields, and broken swords,  bows  and
darts  and other gear of war. Upon  a stake in  the  middle was set a  great
goblin head;  upon its shattered helm the  white badge could  still be seen.
Further away, not far from the river, where  it  came streaming out from the
edge of  the wood, there was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was
covered with fresh-cut turves: about it were planted fifteen spears.
Aragorn and  his  companions  searched far and wide about  the field of
battle,  but  the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim and misty. By
nightfall they had discovered no trace of Merry and Pippin.
'We can  do no more,' said Gimli sadly. 'We have been set  many riddles
since we  came to Tol Brandir, but this  is the hardest to  unravel. I would
guess  that the burned bones of  the hobbits are now mingled with the Orcs'.
It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to hear it; and hard too for the
old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their coming.'
'But Gandalf was not,' said Legolas.
'But Gandalf chose  to come himself, and he was the first to be  lost '
answered Gimli. 'His foresight failed him.'
'The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for
himself  or for  others,' said Aragorn. 'There are some  things that  it  is
better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall
not  depart  from  this  place yet.  In  any  case  we  must  here await the
morning-light.'
A little way  beyond  the battle-field they  made  their  camp under  a
spreading tree: it looked  like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many broad
brown leaves  of a former year,  like dry  hands with long splayed  fingers;
they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze.
Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. 'Let us light
a fire,'  he said. 'I  care  no longer for the  danger. Let the Orcs come as
thick as summer-moths round a candle!'
'If those  unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it  might draw them
hither,' said Legolas.
'And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,' said Aragorn.
'We are  near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. Also we are on
the  very edge of Fangorn,  and  it is  perilous to touch  the trees of that
wood, it is said.'
'But  the Rohirrim  made a  great burning here yesterday,'  said Gimli,
'and  they felled  trees for the fire, as can be seen.  Yet they passed  the
night after safely here, when their labour was ended.'
'They were  many,' said  Aragorn,  'and they  do not heed the wrath  of
Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under  the trees. But
our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself. So have a care!
Cut no living wood!'
'There  is no need,' said  Gimli. 'The Riders have  left chip and bough
enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.' He went off to gather fuel,
and busied himself with building and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent
with his back to the great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in
the open, looking towards the profound  shadow of the wood, leaning forward,
as one who listens to voices calling from a distance.
When the  Dwarf had  a  small bright blaze going, the three  companions
drew close  to  it and sat together,  shrouding  the light with their hooded
forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above them.
'Look!' he said. 'The tree is glad of the fire!'
It  may  have  been  that the dancing  shadows tricked their eyes,  but
certainly to each  of the companions the  boughs appeared to be bending this
way and that so as to come  above the flames, while  the upper branches were
stooping down; the brown  leaves  now stood  out  stiff, and rubbed together
like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth.
There was a silence, for suddenly the dark  and unknown forest, so near
at hand,  made itself  felt  as  a great  brooding presence, full  of secret
purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again.
'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,' he said. 'Do you  know
why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard?'
'I have heard many  tales  in Gondor and elsewhere,' said Aragorn, 'but
if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that
Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of  asking you what
was
the truth of the  matter. And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall
