hither,' said Legolas.
'And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,' said Aragorn.
'We are  near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. Also we are on
the  very edge of Fangorn,  and  it is  perilous to touch  the trees of that
wood, it is said.'
'But  the Rohirrim  made a  great burning here yesterday,'  said Gimli,
'and  they felled  trees for the fire, as can be seen.  Yet they passed  the
night after safely here, when their labour was ended.'
'They were  many,' said  Aragorn,  'and they  do not heed the wrath  of
Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under  the trees. But
our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself. So have a care!
Cut no living wood!'
'There  is no need,' said  Gimli. 'The Riders have  left chip and bough
enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.' He went off to gather fuel,
and busied himself with building and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent
with his back to the great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in
the open, looking towards the profound  shadow of the wood, leaning forward,
as one who listens to voices calling from a distance.
When the  Dwarf had  a  small bright blaze going, the three  companions
drew close  to  it and sat together,  shrouding  the light with their hooded
forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above them.
'Look!' he said. 'The tree is glad of the fire!'
It  may  have  been  that the dancing  shadows tricked their eyes,  but
certainly to each  of the companions the  boughs appeared to be bending this
way and that so as to come  above the flames, while  the upper branches were
stooping down; the brown  leaves  now stood  out  stiff, and rubbed together
like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth.
There was a silence, for suddenly the dark  and unknown forest, so near
at hand,  made itself  felt  as  a great  brooding presence, full  of secret
purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again.
'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,' he said. 'Do you  know
why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard?'
'I have heard many  tales  in Gondor and elsewhere,' said Aragorn, 'but
if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that
Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of  asking you what
was
the truth of the  matter. And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall
a Man answer?'
'You  have  journeyed  further  than  I,'  said Legolas. 'I  have heard
nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that  tell how the  Onodrim,
that Men  call Ents,  dwelt there long ago; for Fangorn is old, old  even as
the Elves would reckon it.'
'Yes,  it  is  old,'  said  Aragorn,  'as  old  as the  forest  by  the
Barrow-downs, and it is  far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, the
last  strongholds  of  the  mighty  woods of the  Elder Days, in  which  the
Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some secret of its
own. What it is I do not know.'
'And  I  do not wish to know,' said Gimli. 'Let nothing that  dwells in
Fangorn be troubled on my account!'
They  now drew  lots for the watches, and the lot for  the first  watch
fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid hold  on them.
'Gimli!' said  Aragorn drowsily. 'Remember, it is perilous  to  cut bough or
twig from  a living tree  in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead
wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!'
With  that  he  fell asleep.  Legolas already lay motionless, his  fair
hands folded upon  his breast,  his eyes unclosed, blending living night and
deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli sat hunched by the fire, running
his thumb  thoughtfully along  the edge of  his axe. The tree rustled. There
was no other sound.
Suddenly  Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the fire-light
stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in a great cloak; his
wide-brimmed hat was pulled  down over his eyes. Gimli sprang up, too
amazed
for the moment to  cry out, though at once the thought flashed into his mind
that Saruman had caught them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his
sudden
movement, sat up and stared. The old man did not speak or make, sign.
'Well, father,  what can we do  for you?'  said Aragorn, leaping to his
feet. 'Come and be warm, if you are cold!'  He strode  forward, but the  old
man was gone. There  was  no trace of him to be found near at hand, and they
did not dare to wander far. The moon had set and the night was very dark.
Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. 'The horses! The horses!'
The horses were gone.  They had dragged their pickets and  disappeared.
For  me time the three companions stood still  and silent, troubled  by this
new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless
leagues lay  between them and the Men of  Rohan,  their only friends in this
wide  and dangerous land. As they stood, it seemed to  them that they heard,
far off in the night. the sound of horses whinnying and  neighing. Then  all
was quiet again, except for the cold rustle of the wind.
'Well, they are gone,' said  Aragorn at last. 'We cannot  find  them or
catch  them;  so that  if they do not return of their  own will, we must  do
without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.'
'Feet!' said Gimli. 'But we cannot eat them as well  as walk on  them '
He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it.
'Only a few hours ago  you were unwilling  to sit on a horse of Rohan,'
laughed Legolas. 'You will make a rider yet.'
'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,' said Gimli.
'If you wish  to know what I think,'  he began  again after  a while 'I
think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember  the words of Jomer: he walks
about
like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were  the words.  He has gone  off
with our horses, or scared them away, and here we are. There is more trouble
coming to us, mark my words!'
'I mark them,' said Aragorn. 'But I marked also that this old man had a
hat not a hood. Still I do not  doubt that  you guess right, and that we are
in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we
can do but  rest, while we may. I will  watch for a while now, Gimli. I have
more need of thought than of sleep.'
The night  passed  slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli followed
Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing  happened. The old man did
not appear again, and the horses did not return.
