new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless
leagues lay  between them and the Men of  Rohan,  their only friends in this
wide  and dangerous land. As they stood, it seemed to  them that they heard,
far off in the night. the sound of horses whinnying and  neighing. Then  all
was quiet again, except for the cold rustle of the wind.
'Well, they are gone,' said  Aragorn at last. 'We cannot  find  them or
catch  them;  so that  if they do not return of their  own will, we must  do
without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.'
'Feet!' said Gimli. 'But we cannot eat them as well  as walk on  them '
He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it.
'Only a few hours ago  you were unwilling  to sit on a horse of Rohan,'
laughed Legolas. 'You will make a rider yet.'
'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,' said Gimli.
'If you wish  to know what I think,'  he began  again after  a while 'I
think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember  the words of Jomer: he walks
about
like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were  the words.  He has gone  off
with our horses, or scared them away, and here we are. There is more trouble
coming to us, mark my words!'
'I mark them,' said Aragorn. 'But I marked also that this old man had a
hat not a hood. Still I do not  doubt that  you guess right, and that we are
in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we
can do but  rest, while we may. I will  watch for a while now, Gimli. I have
more need of thought than of sleep.'
The night  passed  slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli followed
Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing  happened. The old man did
not appear again, and the horses did not return.
Chapter 3. The Uruk-Hai
Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream:  it seemed that he could  hear
his own small  voice  echoing in black tunnels,  calling                Frodo, Frodo!        But
instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous  orc-faces grinned  at  him  out of the
shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him from  every side. Where
was
Merry?
He  woke. Cold air blew on his  face. He was lying on his back. Evening
was coming and  the sky above was growing dim. He turned and found that  the
dream  was little worse than  the  waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were
tied with cords.  Beside him Merry lay,  white-faced, with a dirty rag bound
across his brows. All about them sat or stood a great company of Orcs.
Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became
separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and  Merry had run off into  the
woods. What had come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking
no
notice  of  old  Strider? They  had  run a  long  way shouting--he could not
remember how far or how long; and then suddenly they had crashed  right into
a  group  of Orcs: they  were standing listening, and they did not appear to
see Merry and Pippin until they were  almost in their arms. Then they yelled
and  dozens of other goblins had sprung out  of the  trees. Merry and he had
drawn their swords, but the  Orcs did not wish to fight, and had tried  only
to lay  hold of them, even when Merry had cut off several  of their arms and
hands. Good old Merry!
Then  Boromir  had come  leaping through  the  trees. He had made  them
fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled.  But they had not gone far on
the way back when they were attacked again. by a hundred Orcs at least, some
of  them very large, and they shot  a rain of  arrows:  always  at  Boromir.
Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang,  and at first the Orcs
had  been dismayed and  had  drawn back; but when no  answer but the  echoes
came, they had attacked more fierce  than ever. Pippin did not remember much
more.  His last memo was of Boromir  leaning against a tree, plucking out an
arrow; then darkness fell suddenly.
'I suppose I was knocked on the head,' he said to himself. 'I wonder if
poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to  Boromir? Why  didn't the
Orcs
kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?'
He could  not  answer the questions. He felt  cold and  sick.  'I  wish
Gandalf  had never persuaded Elrond to let  us come,' he thought. 'What good
have I been? Just a  nuisance: a  passenger, a piece  of luggage. And now  I
have been stolen  and I am  just  a piece of  luggage for the  Orcs.  I hope
Strider or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope for it? Won't
that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!'
He  struggled  a little, quite  uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable  tongue. 'Rest
while  you  can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech,
which he made almost  as hideous as  his own language.  'Rest while you can!
We'll find  a use for your  legs before  long. You'll wish you had  got none
before we get home.'
'If I had my way, you'd  wish you  were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd
make you squeak,  you miserable rat.' He stooped over  Pippin  bringing  his
yellow fangs close to his face.  He had  a  black  knife  with a long jagged
blade  in  his hand.  'Lie quiet, or  I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed.
'Don't  draw attention  to yourself,  or  I may forget my orders.  Curse the
Isengarders!     Ugl®k  u  bagronk sha  pushdug Saruman-glob  b®bhosh skai':
he
passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into
muttering and snarling.
Terrified  Pippin lay still, though the pain at  his wrists  and ankles
was  growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back.  To take
his mind off himself he listened intently to all that  he could  hear. There
were many  voices round about, and though orc-speech  sounded  at all  times
full  of hate and anger, it  seemed plain  that something like a quarrel had
begun, and was getting hotter.
To Pippin's  surprise he  found that much of the  talk was intelligible
many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of
two
or three quite different tribes  were present, and they could not understand
one another's orc-speech. There  was  an angry  debate concerning  what they
were to do now: which way they were to take and what should be done with the
prisoners.
