poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to  Boromir? Why  didn't the
Orcs
kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?'
He could  not  answer the questions. He felt  cold and  sick.  'I  wish
Gandalf  had never persuaded Elrond to let  us come,' he thought. 'What good
have I been? Just a  nuisance: a  passenger, a piece  of luggage. And now  I
have been stolen  and I am  just  a piece of  luggage for the  Orcs.  I hope
Strider or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope for it? Won't
that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!'
He  struggled  a little, quite  uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable  tongue. 'Rest
while  you  can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech,
which he made almost  as hideous as  his own language.  'Rest while you can!
We'll find  a use for your  legs before  long. You'll wish you had  got none
before we get home.'
'If I had my way, you'd  wish you  were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd
make you squeak,  you miserable rat.' He stooped over  Pippin  bringing  his
yellow fangs close to his face.  He had  a  black  knife  with a long jagged
blade  in  his hand.  'Lie quiet, or  I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed.
'Don't  draw attention  to yourself,  or  I may forget my orders.  Curse the
Isengarders!     Ugl®k  u  bagronk sha  pushdug Saruman-glob  b®bhosh skai':
he
passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into
muttering and snarling.
Terrified  Pippin lay still, though the pain at  his wrists  and ankles
was  growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back.  To take
his mind off himself he listened intently to all that  he could  hear. There
were many  voices round about, and though orc-speech  sounded  at all  times
full  of hate and anger, it  seemed plain  that something like a quarrel had
begun, and was getting hotter.
To Pippin's  surprise he  found that much of the  talk was intelligible
many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of
two
or three quite different tribes  were present, and they could not understand
one another's orc-speech. There  was  an angry  debate concerning  what they
were to do now: which way they were to take and what should be done with the
prisoners.
'There's no time to kill them properly,' said one. 'No time for play on
this trip.'
'That  can't  be helped,' said another. 'But why not kill  them  quick,
kill them  now? They're  a cursed  nuisance, and we're in a hurry. Evening's
coming on, and we ought to get a move on.'
'Orders.' said a third  voice in  a  deep growl.         'Kill all but    NOT    the
Halfings;  they are to be brought back            ALIVE      as quickly as possible      . That's
my orders.'
'What are they wanted for?'  asked  several voices. 'Why alive? Do they
give good sport?'
'No!  I  heard that  one of them has  got something,  something  that's
wanted for  the  War,  some  elvish plot  or other.  Anyway they'll both  be
questioned.'
'Is that all you know? Why don't  we search them and find out? We might
find something that we could use ourselves.'
'That is a very interesting remark,' sneered a  voice,  softer than the
others but more evil. 'I may have to report that. The prisoners  are  NOT to
be searched or plundered: those are           my   orders.'
'And  mine  too,'  said  the  deep  voice. '       Alive and as  captured;  no
spoiling.   That's my orders.'
'Not our orders!' said one of the earlier voices. 'We have come all the
way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. I wish to kill, and then go
back north.'
'Then you can wish  again,' said the  growling voice. 'I  am  Ugl®k.  I
command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.'
'Is Saruman the  master  or the Great Eye?'  said the  evil  voice. 'We
should go back at once to Lugb®rz.'
'If we could cross the Great River, we might,' said another voice. 'But
there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.'
'I came  across,'  said  the evil  voice.  'A winged  Nazgyl awaits  us
northward on the east-bank.'
'Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get  all the
pay and praise in Lugb®rz,  and leave  us to foot it as best we  can through
the Horse-country.  No, we must  stick together.  These lands are dangerous:
full of foul rebels and brigands.'
'Aye, we must stick together,' growled Ugl®k. 'I don't trust you little
swine. You've no guts outside your own sties. But for us you'd all  have run
away. We are the fighting  Uruk-hai! We slew the  great warrior. We took the
prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand
that gives us man's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here,
and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Ugl®k. I have spoken.'
'You have  spoken more than enough,  Ugl®k,' sneered the evil voice. 'I
wonder how  they would like  it  in  Lugb®rz. They might think  that Ugl®k's
shoulders  needed relieving  of a  swollen head. They might  ask  where  his
strange ideas came  from. Did they come  from Saruman, perhaps? Who  does
he
think he is, setting up on his own with his  filthy white badges? They might
agree with me, with  Grishnbkh their trusted messenger; and I  Grishnbkh say
this: Saruman is a fool. and a dirty treacherous fool. But the  Great Eye is
on him.
' Swine   is  it? How  do  you  folk  like  being  called          swine    by  the
muck-rakers  of  a  dirty  little  wizard?  It's  orc-flesh  they  eat, I'll
warrant.'
Many loud yells  in orc-speech  answered him, and the ringing  clash of
weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would
happen.  His guards had gone to  join in the  fray. In the twilight he saw a
large  black  Orc,  probably  Ugl®k,  standing  facing  Grishnbkh,  a  short
crook-legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the
ground. Round  them  were many smaller  goblins. Pippin supposed that  these
were the ones from the  North. They had drawn  their knives and swords,  but
hesitated to attack Ugl®k.
Ugl®k  shouted, and a  number of other Orcs of  nearly his own size ran
up. Then suddenly, without  warning, Ugl®k sprang  forwards,  and  with  two
swift strokes swept  the heads  off two of his opponents.  Grishnbkh stepped
aside and  vanished  into the  shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped
backwards  and fell  over Merry's  prostrate  form with  a  curse. Yet  that
probably saved his life, for Ugl®k's followers leaped over him and  cut down
another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged  guard. His
body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife.
'Put up your weapons!' shouted Ugl®k. 'And let's have no more nonsense!
We go straight west  from here, and down the stair.  From  there straight to
the  downs, then along the  river to the forest. And we march day and night.
That clear?'
'Now,' thought  Pippin,  'if  only it takes  that ugly  fellow a little
