away. We are the fighting  Uruk-hai! We slew the  great warrior. We took the
prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand
that gives us man's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here,
and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Ugl®k. I have spoken.'
'You have  spoken more than enough,  Ugl®k,' sneered the evil voice. 'I
wonder how  they would like  it  in  Lugb®rz. They might think  that Ugl®k's
shoulders  needed relieving  of a  swollen head. They might  ask  where  his
strange ideas came  from. Did they come  from Saruman, perhaps? Who  does
he
think he is, setting up on his own with his  filthy white badges? They might
agree with me, with  Grishnbkh their trusted messenger; and I  Grishnbkh say
this: Saruman is a fool. and a dirty treacherous fool. But the  Great Eye is
on him.
' Swine   is  it? How  do  you  folk  like  being  called          swine    by  the
muck-rakers  of  a  dirty  little  wizard?  It's  orc-flesh  they  eat, I'll
warrant.'
Many loud yells  in orc-speech  answered him, and the ringing  clash of
weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would
happen.  His guards had gone to  join in the  fray. In the twilight he saw a
large  black  Orc,  probably  Ugl®k,  standing  facing  Grishnbkh,  a  short
crook-legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the
ground. Round  them  were many smaller  goblins. Pippin supposed that  these
were the ones from the  North. They had drawn  their knives and swords,  but
hesitated to attack Ugl®k.
Ugl®k  shouted, and a  number of other Orcs of  nearly his own size ran
up. Then suddenly, without  warning, Ugl®k sprang  forwards,  and  with  two
swift strokes swept  the heads  off two of his opponents.  Grishnbkh stepped
aside and  vanished  into the  shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped
backwards  and fell  over Merry's  prostrate  form with  a  curse. Yet  that
probably saved his life, for Ugl®k's followers leaped over him and  cut down
another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged  guard. His
body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife.
'Put up your weapons!' shouted Ugl®k. 'And let's have no more nonsense!
We go straight west  from here, and down the stair.  From  there straight to
the  downs, then along the  river to the forest. And we march day and night.
That clear?'
'Now,' thought  Pippin,  'if  only it takes  that ugly  fellow a little
while to get his  troop under control, I've got  a chance.' A gleam of  hope
had come to him. The edge  of the black knife had snicked his arm, and  then
slid down to his wrist.  He  felt the blood trickling on to his hand, but he
also felt the cold touch of steel against his skin.
The Orcs were getting ready to march again, but some of the Northerners
were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were
cowed.  There  was  much  cursing  and confusion. For  the moment Pippin was
unwatched. His legs were  securely bound, but his arms were  only tied about
the wrists,  and his hands were  in front  of  him. He could  move them both
together, though the bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Orc to one
side, then hardly daring to  breathe, he drew the  knot of the wrist-cord up
and down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand held
it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his fingers and knotted
it again into a loose  bracelet of two loops and slipped it  over his hands.
Then he lay very still.
'Pick up those prisoners!' shouted Ugl®k.  'Don't play any  tricks with
them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.'
An Orc  seized Pippin like a sack. put its head between his tied hands,
grabbed his arms and  dragged them  down, until  Pippin's  face was  crushed
against its neck; then it jolted off  with him. Another treated Merry in the
same way. The Orc's clawlike hand gripped Pippin's arms like iron; the nails
bit into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams.
Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night,
but the  slim moon was already falling westward. They were on the  edge of a
cliff that seemed to look out  over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of
water falling nearby.
'The scouts have come back at last,' said an Orc close at hand.
'Well, what did you discover?' growled the voice of Ugl®k.
'Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All's clear now.'
'Now,  I  daresay. But how  long? You fools! You should  have shot him.
He'll  raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning.
Now we'll have to leg it double quick.'
A shadow bent over  Pippin. It  was Ugl®k. 'Sit up!' said the  Orc. 'My
lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down and you  must
use your legs. Be  helpful now. No  crying out, no trying to escape. We have
ways of paying for tricks that you won't like, though they won't spoil  your
usefulness for the Master.'
He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him  up by his
hair  and stood him  on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Ugl®k dragged him up
by  his hair again. Several Orcs  laughed. Ugl®k thrust a  flask between his
teeth and poured some burning liquid down  his  throat: he felt a hot fierce
glow  flow through  him.  The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could
stand.
'Now for  the other!' said Ugl®k.  Pippin saw him go  to Merry, who was
lying  close  by,  and kick  him. Merry groaned.  Seizing him roughly  Ugl®k
pulled  him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then
he smeared the wound with some dark  stuff out of a small wooden  box. Merry
cried out and struggled wildly.
The Orcs clapped and  hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,'  they  jeered.
'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.'
But  at the moment Ugl®k was not engaged in  sport. He needed speed and
had to humour  unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in orc-fashion; and
his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down
the  hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to  his feet, Merry
stood up, looking pale but grim  and defiant, and very  much alive. The gash
in his forehead gave him  no  more trouble, but he bore a  brown scar to the
end of his days.
'Hullo, Pippin!' he said.  'So you've come on  this  little expedition,
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?'
'Now then!' said Ugl®k.  'None of that!  Hold your tongues. No  talk to
one another. Any  trouble will be  reported at the other end, and He'll know
how to pay  you. You'll  get bed and breakfast  all right: more than you can
stomach.'
The orc-band  began to descend a  narrow ravine  leading down into  the
misty plain below.  Merry and  Pippin,  separated by a  dozen  Orcs or more,
climbed down with  them. At the  bottom  they  stepped on to  grass, and the
hearts of the hobbits rose.
'Now  straight on!'  shouted Ugl®k. 'West  and a  little  north. Follow
Lugdush.'
'But what are we going to do at sunrise?' said some of the Northerners.
'Go on running,' said Ugl®k. 'What do you think? Sit  on the  grass and
wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?'
'But we can't run in the sunlight.'
'You'll run with me  behind you,' said Ugl®k. 'Run! Or you'll never see
