'Such questions cannot be  answered,'  said Gandalf.  'You may be  sure
that it was not  for any merit that others do not possess: not for  power or
wisdom,  at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you  must therefore  use
such strength and heart and wits as you have.'
'But I  have so  little of any  of  these  things!  You  are  wise  and
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?'
'No!' cried Gandalf, springing  to  his feet. 'With that power I should
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring  would  gain a power
still greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face  was lit as by
a fire within. 'Do not tempt me! For I do not  wish to become like the  Dark
Lord  himself. Yet the  way of the  Ring  to  my heart is by pity, pity  for
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do  not tempt me! I dare not
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too
great, for my  strength.  I shall  have  such  need of it. Great  perils lie
before me.'
He  went to the  window and drew aside the curtains  and the  shutters.
Sunlight  streamed  back again into  the  room. Sam  passed  along the  path
outside whistling. 'And now,'  said  the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the
decision lies with you. But  I will always  help you.' He  laid his hand  on
Frodo's shoulder. 'I will help you bear this  burden, as long as It is yours
to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.'
There was a long  silence.  Gandalf  sat down again and puffed  at  his
pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes  seemed closed, but under the  lids he
was watching Frodo  intently. Frodo  gazed fixedly at the red embers on  the
hearth,  until they filled all his vision,  and he seemed to be looking down
into  profound  wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled  Cracks of Doom
and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.
'Well!'  said Gandalf at last.  'What are you  thinking about? Have you
decided what to do?'
'No!'  answered Frodo,  coming back to himself  out  of  darkness,  and
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the  window he
could see the sunlit garden.  'Or perhaps, yes.  As far as I understand what
you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the
present, whatever it may do to me.'
'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with
that purpose,' said Gandalf.
'I hope so,'  said Frodo.  'But I  hope  that  you may  find some other
better  keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it  seems that I  am  a  danger, a
danger  to all that live near  me.  I cannot  keep the Ring and stay here. I
ought to leave  Bag End,  leave the Shire, leave everything and go away.' He
sighed.
'I should like to  save  the Shire, if I could - though there have been
times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have
felt that an earthquake or  an invasion of dragons might  be good  for them.
But  I don't feel  like that  now. I feel  that  as  long as the Shire  lies
behind, safe and comfortable, I shall find  wandering more bearable: I shall
know that somewhere there is a firm  foothold, even if my feet  cannot stand
there again.
'Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that
as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's  or better, ending
in  peace. But this  would  mean exile,  a  flight from danger into  danger,
drawing  it after me. And I suppose I  must go alone, if I am to do that and
save  the Shire.  But I  feel very  small, and  very  uprooted,  and  well -
desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.'
He did  not tell  Gandalf, but as  he  was speaking a  great desire  to
follow  Bilbo flamed up in his heart - to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps  to
find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he  could almost
have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done
on a similar morning long ago.
'My  dear  Frodo!'  exclaimed  Gandalf.  'Hobbits  really  are  amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You  can learn all that there  is  to know
about their  ways in a month, and yet after  a hundred  years they can still
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get  such  an answer, not even
from  you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though  he little
thought how important it  would prove. I am afraid  you are  right. The Ring
will not be able to stay hidden in the  Shire much longer; and for  your own
sake, as  well  as  for others, you  will have to go, and leave the  name of
Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or
in the Wild. I will give  you a travelling name now. When you go, go as  Mr.
Underhill.
'But I don't think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you can
trust, and who would be willing  to go by your side -  and that you would be
willing to take  into unknown perils.  But  if you look for a  companion, be
careful in choosing! And be  careful of what  you say,  even to your closest
friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.'
Suddenly he  stopped as if  listening.  Frodo became aware that all was
very quiet,  inside and  outside. Gandalf  crept to one side of  the window.
Then with  a  dart he  sprang to  the sill,  and thrust a  long arm out  and
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head
hauled by
one ear.
'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now what
may you be doing?'
'Lor bless  you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!' said Sam. 'Nothing! Leastways I was
just  trimming the grass-border  under  the window,  if you  follow me.'  He
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.
'I don't,' said Gandalf grimly. It is some time  since I last heard the
sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?'
'Eavesdropping,  sir? I don't  follow you, begging  your pardon.  There
ain't no eaves at Bag End, and that's a fact.'
'Don't be  a  fool! What  have  you  heard,  and why  did you  listen?'
Gandalf's eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.
'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't
let  him turn  me  into anything unnatural!  My old  dad would take on so. I
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!'
'He  won't hurt you,' said Frodo,  hardly able to keep  from  laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'He knows, as well as I
do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight
away!'
'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn't
rightly  understand,  about an  enemy, and  rings, and  Mr. Bilbo, sir,  and
dragons, and a  fiery mountain, and - and  Elves, sir. I listened because  I
couldn't help  myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless  me, sir, but I do
love tales of  that sort. And  I believe  them  too,  whatever Ted may  say.
Elves,  sir! I  would dearly love  to see         them.   Couldn't you take  me to see
Elves, sir, when you go?'
Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'Come  inside!' he shouted,  and  putting out
both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all,
right through the window and stood him on the floor. 'Take you to see Elves,
eh?' he  said, eyeing Sam  closely, but with a smile flickering on his face.
'So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?'
