He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him  up by his
hair  and stood him  on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Ugl®k dragged him up
by  his hair again. Several Orcs  laughed. Ugl®k thrust a  flask between his
teeth and poured some burning liquid down  his  throat: he felt a hot fierce
glow  flow through  him.  The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could
stand.
'Now for  the other!' said Ugl®k.  Pippin saw him go  to Merry, who was
lying  close  by,  and kick  him. Merry groaned.  Seizing him roughly  Ugl®k
pulled  him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then
he smeared the wound with some dark  stuff out of a small wooden  box. Merry
cried out and struggled wildly.
The Orcs clapped and  hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,'  they  jeered.
'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.'
But  at the moment Ugl®k was not engaged in  sport. He needed speed and
had to humour  unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in orc-fashion; and
his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down
the  hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to  his feet, Merry
stood up, looking pale but grim  and defiant, and very  much alive. The gash
in his forehead gave him  no  more trouble, but he bore a  brown scar to the
end of his days.
'Hullo, Pippin!' he said.  'So you've come on  this  little expedition,
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?'
'Now then!' said Ugl®k.  'None of that!  Hold your tongues. No  talk to
one another. Any  trouble will be  reported at the other end, and He'll know
how to pay  you. You'll  get bed and breakfast  all right: more than you can
stomach.'
The orc-band  began to descend a  narrow ravine  leading down into  the
misty plain below.  Merry and  Pippin,  separated by a  dozen  Orcs or more,
climbed down with  them. At the  bottom  they  stepped on to  grass, and the
hearts of the hobbits rose.
'Now  straight on!'  shouted Ugl®k. 'West  and a  little  north. Follow
Lugdush.'
'But what are we going to do at sunrise?' said some of the Northerners.
'Go on running,' said Ugl®k. 'What do you think? Sit  on the  grass and
wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?'
'But we can't run in the sunlight.'
'You'll run with me  behind you,' said Ugl®k. 'Run! Or you'll never see
your beloved  holes again. By  the White Hand! What's the use of sending out
mountain-maggots  on  a trip, only half trained. Run, curse  you! Run  while
night lasts!'
Then the whole  company  began to  run  with the long loping strides of
Orcs. They kept  no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their speed
was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was far back in the
line. He  wondered how long he would be able to  go on at this pace: he  had
had no food since the morning. One of  his guards had a whip. But at present
the orc-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, too, were wide-awake.
Every now and again there  came  into his mind unbidden a vision of the
keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, running behind.
But  what  could even a Ranger see except a confused  trail of orc-feet? His
own  little prints  and Merry's  were overwhelmed by  the  trampling of  the
iron-shod shoes before them and behind them and about them.
They had  gone  only a mile  or so from the cliff when the  land sloped
down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft and wet. Mist
lay there, pale-glimmering in the  last rays of  the  sickle moon.  The dark
shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up.
'Ai! Steady now!' shouted Ugl®k from the rear.
A sudden thought leaped into Pippin's mind, and he acted on it at once.
He  swerved aside to the right, and  dived out of the reach of his clutching
guard, headfirst into the mist; he landed sprawling on the grass.
'Halt!' yelled Ugl®k.
There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran.
But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right in front of him.
'No hope  of escape!' thought Pippin. 'But there is a hope  that I have
left  some of  my own marks unspoilt on the  wet ground.' He groped with his
two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as
long arms and  hard claws seized him. he  let it fall. 'There  I  suppose it
will lie until the end of time,' he thought. 'I don't  know why I did it. If
the others have escaped, they've probably all gone with Frodo.'
A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry.
'Enough!' shouted Ugl®k running  up. 'He's still got to run a long  way
yet. Make 'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.'
'But that's not  all,' he snarled, turning to Pippin. 'I shan't forget.
Payment is only put off. Leg it!'
Neither  Pippin nor Merry remembered  much  of the later  part  of  the
journey. Evil  dreams and evil  waking were blended  into  a  long tunnel of
misery,  with hope  growing ever fainter behind.  They  ran, and  they  ran,
striving to keep up the  pace set by  the Orcs, licked  every now  and again
with a cruel thong cunningly  handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were
seized and dragged for some distance.
The  warmth  of  the orc-draught  had  gone. Pippin felt cold and  sick
again. Suddenly  he  fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending
nails  gripped  and lifted him. He was  carried like a  sack  once more, and
darkness  grew about him:  whether the  darkness  of  another  night,  or  a
blindness of his eyes, he could not tell.
Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that  many of the
Orcs were demanding a halt. Ugl®k was shouting. He felt himself flung to the
ground,  and he lay as he fell, till black dreams  took  him. But he did not
long  escape from  pain; soon  the iron grip of  merciless hands was on  him
again.  For  a  long  time  he was  tossed and shaken, and then  slowly  the
darkness  gave way, and he came  back to the waking  world and found that it
was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.
There  he  lay for a while, fighting  with despair. His head  swam, but
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught.
An Orc stooped over him, and flung him some bread  and a strip of raw  dried
flesh. He ate  the  stale grey  bread hungrily, but  not the  meat.  He  was
famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by an Orc, the
flesh of he dared not guess what creature.
He sat up and looked about.  Merry was not  far away. They were by  the
banks  of a swift narrow  river.  Ahead mountains  loomed: a tall  peak  was
catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower
slopes before them.
There was much shouting and debating among  the Orcs; a  quarrel seemed
on  the  point  of  breaking  out again  between  the  Northerners  and  the
Isengarders. Some  were  pointing back  away south, and  some were  pointing
eastward.
'Very  well,' said Ugl®k. 'Leave them  to me then! No killing,  as I've
told you before; but if you want to  throw away  what we've come all the way
to get, throw it  away! I'll look after it. Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the
work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run!  Run!  There's  the
forest,' he  shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your  best hope.  Off
you go!  And quick,  before I knock a few more heads off, to  put some sense
