journey. Evil  dreams and evil  waking were blended  into  a  long tunnel of
misery,  with hope  growing ever fainter behind.  They  ran, and  they  ran,
striving to keep up the  pace set by  the Orcs, licked  every now  and again
with a cruel thong cunningly  handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were
seized and dragged for some distance.
The  warmth  of  the orc-draught  had  gone. Pippin felt cold and  sick
again. Suddenly  he  fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending
nails  gripped  and lifted him. He was  carried like a  sack  once more, and
darkness  grew about him:  whether the  darkness  of  another  night,  or  a
blindness of his eyes, he could not tell.
Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that  many of the
Orcs were demanding a halt. Ugl®k was shouting. He felt himself flung to the
ground,  and he lay as he fell, till black dreams  took  him. But he did not
long  escape from  pain; soon  the iron grip of  merciless hands was on  him
again.  For  a  long  time  he was  tossed and shaken, and then  slowly  the
darkness  gave way, and he came  back to the waking  world and found that it
was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.
There  he  lay for a while, fighting  with despair. His head  swam, but
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught.
An Orc stooped over him, and flung him some bread  and a strip of raw  dried
flesh. He ate  the  stale grey  bread hungrily, but  not the  meat.  He  was
famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by an Orc, the
flesh of he dared not guess what creature.
He sat up and looked about.  Merry was not  far away. They were by  the
banks  of a swift narrow  river.  Ahead mountains  loomed: a tall  peak  was
catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower
slopes before them.
There was much shouting and debating among  the Orcs; a  quarrel seemed
on  the  point  of  breaking  out again  between  the  Northerners  and  the
Isengarders. Some  were  pointing back  away south, and  some were  pointing
eastward.
'Very  well,' said Ugl®k. 'Leave them  to me then! No killing,  as I've
told you before; but if you want to  throw away  what we've come all the way
to get, throw it  away! I'll look after it. Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the
work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run!  Run!  There's  the
forest,' he  shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your  best hope.  Off
you go!  And quick,  before I knock a few more heads off, to  put some sense
into the others.'
There was some cursing and scuffling, and  then most of the Northerners
broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of  them, running wildly along the
river towards the mountains.  The hobbits were left with the  Isengarders: a
grim  dark  band, four score at  least of large, swart, slant-eyed Orcs with
great bows and short  broad-bladed swords. A  few  of the larger and  bolder
Northerners remained with them.
'Now we'll deal with  Grishnbkh,'  said Ugl®k; but some even of his own
followers were looking uneasily southwards.
'I  know,' growled Ugl®k.  'The cursed horse-boys have got  wind of us.
But  that's all your  fault,  Snaga. You and the  other scouts ought to have
your ears cut  off. But we are the fighters. We'll feast  on horseflesh yet,
or something better.'
At  that moment Pippin  saw why some  of the  troop  had been  pointing
eastward. From  that  direction there  now came hoarse cries, and  there was
Grishnbkh again, and  at his  back a  couple  of  score of others like  him:
long-armed  crook-legged Orcs. They  had a red eye painted on their shields.
Ugl®k stepped forward to meet them. 'So you've come back?' he said. 'Thought
better of it, eh?'
'I've returned to  see  that  Orders are  carried out and the prisoners
safe,' answered Grishnbkh.
'Indeed!'  said Ugl®k.  'Waste  of  effort.  I'll see that  orders  are
carried out in my command. And what else did you  come back for? You went
in
a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?'
'I left a  fool,' snarled Grishnbkh. 'But there were some stout fellows
with him that are too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them into a mess. I've
come to help them.'
'Splendid!'  laughed  Ugl®k.  'But  unless  you've  got some  guts  for
fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugb®rz was your road.  The
Whiteskins
are coming. What's happened to your  precious  Nazgyl?  Has  he had  another
mount shot under him? Now, if you'd brought him along, that might have  been
useful-if these Nazgyl are all they make out.'
' Nazgyl, Nazgyl   ,' said Grishnbkh, shivering and licking his lips, as if
the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. 'You  speak of what is
deep beyond the  reach of your muddy  dreams,  Ugl®k,' he said. '                    Nazgyl!    Ah!
All that  they make  out! One day  you'll  wish that you  had not said that.
Ape!' he snarled fiercely.  'You ought to know that they're the apple of the
Great Eye. But the winged  Nazgyl: not  yet, not yet. He won't let them show
themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War-and
other purposes.'
'You seem  to know a lot,' said  Ugl®k. 'More  than is good for you,  I
guess.  Perhaps those  in  Lugb®rz  might wonder how, and  why. But  in  the
meantime the  Uruk-hai of Isengard can do the dirty  work,  as usual.  Don't
stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging
it to the forest. You'd better  follow.  You wouldn't get  back to the Great
River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I'll be on your heels.'
The Isengarders seized Merry and  Pippin again  and slung them on their
backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, pausing now and
again only to sling the hobbits to fresh  carriers. Either because they were
quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnbkh's, the Isengarders
gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor,  and Grishnbkh's folk closed in
behind. Soon they  were  gaining also on  the Northerners ahead.  The forest
began to draw nearer.
Pippin was bruised and torn,  his aching  head was grated by the filthy
jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in front were bowed
backs, and tough thick legs going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if
they were made of wire and horn,  beating out  the nightmare seconds  of  an
endless time.
In  the  afternoon Ugl®k's  troop overtook the  Northerners.  They were
flagging in the rays  of the  bright sun, winter sun shining in  a pale cool
sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out.
'Maggots!' jeered the Isengarders. 'You're cooked. The Whiteskins  will
catch you and eat you. They're coming!'
A cry  from Grishnbkh  showed that  this was  not mere jest.  Horsemen,
riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still  far behind, but gaining
on the Orcs, gaining on  them like a tide over the flats on folk straying in
a quicksand.
The  Isengarders  began  to run with a redoubled  pace that  astonished
Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed  for the end of  a race. Then he saw that
the  sun was sinking, falling behind the  Misty Mountains;  shadows  reached
over the land. The soldiers  of Mordor lifted their heads and  also began to
put on  speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a  few
