All that  they make  out! One day  you'll  wish that you  had not said that.
Ape!' he snarled fiercely.  'You ought to know that they're the apple of the
Great Eye. But the winged  Nazgyl: not  yet, not yet. He won't let them show
themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War-and
other purposes.'
'You seem  to know a lot,' said  Ugl®k. 'More  than is good for you,  I
guess.  Perhaps those  in  Lugb®rz  might wonder how, and  why. But  in  the
meantime the  Uruk-hai of Isengard can do the dirty  work,  as usual.  Don't
stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging
it to the forest. You'd better  follow.  You wouldn't get  back to the Great
River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I'll be on your heels.'
The Isengarders seized Merry and  Pippin again  and slung them on their
backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, pausing now and
again only to sling the hobbits to fresh  carriers. Either because they were
quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnbkh's, the Isengarders
gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor,  and Grishnbkh's folk closed in
behind. Soon they  were  gaining also on  the Northerners ahead.  The forest
began to draw nearer.
Pippin was bruised and torn,  his aching  head was grated by the filthy
jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in front were bowed
backs, and tough thick legs going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if
they were made of wire and horn,  beating out  the nightmare seconds  of  an
endless time.
In  the  afternoon Ugl®k's  troop overtook the  Northerners.  They were
flagging in the rays  of the  bright sun, winter sun shining in  a pale cool
sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out.
'Maggots!' jeered the Isengarders. 'You're cooked. The Whiteskins  will
catch you and eat you. They're coming!'
A cry  from Grishnbkh  showed that  this was  not mere jest.  Horsemen,
riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still  far behind, but gaining
on the Orcs, gaining on  them like a tide over the flats on folk straying in
a quicksand.
The  Isengarders  began  to run with a redoubled  pace that  astonished
Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed  for the end of  a race. Then he saw that
the  sun was sinking, falling behind the  Misty Mountains;  shadows  reached
over the land. The soldiers  of Mordor lifted their heads and  also began to
put on  speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a  few
outlying trees.  The land was beginning to slope upwards. ever more steeply;
but the  Orcs did not halt. Both Ugl®k and Grishnbkh  shouted, spurring them
on to a last effort.
'They will  make it yet. They will escape,' thought Pippin. And then he
managed  to twist  his neck.  so  as  to  glance back with  one eye over his
shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Orcs,
galloping over  the plain.  The sunset gilded their spears  and helmets, and
glinted  in  their  pale  flowing  hair.  They  were  hemming the  Orcs  in,
preventing them  from  scattering, and  driving them along the  line of  the
river.
He wondered  very much what kind of folk they were. He wished  now that
he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps and things; but in
those days the plans for the journey seemed to be  in  more competent hands,
and he had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf, or from  Strider,
and  even  from Frodo. All  that he  could remember  about  Rohan  was  that
Gandalf's horse, Shadowfax,  had come from  that land. That sounded hopeful,
as far as it went.
'But how will  they know that  we are not  Orcs?' he thought. 'I  don't
suppose they've ever  heard  of hobbits down  here. I suppose I  ought to be
glad that the beastly Orcs  look like being destroyed, but I would rather be
saved  myself.' The chances were that  he and Merry would be killed together
with their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of them.
A few of  the riders appeared to be bowmen,  skilled at shooting from a
running horse. Riding swiftly into  range they shot arrows at  the Orcs that
straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the riders wheeled away out
of the range of the answering  bows  of their  enemies, who shot wildly, not
daring to halt. This  happened many  times, and on one  occasion arrows fell
among  the Isengarders. One  of them, just  in front of Pippin, stumbled and
did not get up again.
Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Orcs had
fallen,  but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness the Orcs came
to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably  no more than
three  furlongs  away,  but  they  could go no  further.  The  horsemen  had
encircled them. A small band  disobeyed  Ugl®k's command, and ran on
towards
the forest: only three returned.
'Well,  here  we are,' sneered Grishnbkh. 'Fine  leadership! I hope the
great Ugl®k will lead us out again.'
'Put  those  Halflings  down!'  ordered  Ugl®k,  taking  no  notice  of
Grishnbkh. 'You, Lugdush, get two others  and stand guard over them! They're
not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As
long  as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and  they're not
to be rescued. Bind their legs!'
The last  part  of  the order was  carried  out mercilessly. But Pippin
found that for the first time he was close to  Merry. The Orcs were making a
great deal of noise,  shouting and  clashing  their weapons, and the hobbits
managed to whisper together for a while.
'I don't think much of this,' said Merry. 'I feel nearly done in. Don't
think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.'
' Lembas!  ' whispered Pippin. '     Lembas:     I've got some. Have  you? I  don't
think they've taken anything but our swords.'
'Yes,  I  had a packet in  my pocket,'  answered Merry, 'but it must be
battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket!'
'You won't have to. I've--'; but just then  a savage kick warned Pippin
that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful.
The night was  cold  and still. All round the knoll on which  the  Orcs
were gathered little watch-fires sprang up,  golden-red  in the  darkness, a
complete ring  of them. They were within a long bowshot.  but the riders did
not  show themselves against  the light,  and the  Orcs wasted  many  arrows
shooting at the  fires, until Ugl®k  stopped them. The riders made no sound.
Later  in the night when the moon came  out of the  mist,  then occasionally
they could be seen, shadowy  shapes that glinted now and again in the  white
light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol.
'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why
don't we get together and charge through? What's old Ugl®k think he's doing,
I should like to know?'
'I daresay you would,' snarled Ugl®k stepping up from behind.  'Meaning
I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the  other rabble: the
maggots and the apes of Lugb®rz. No good trying  to charge with them. They'd
just squeal  and bolt,  and  there  are  more than  enough of  these  filthy
horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat.
'There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets
in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from
all  I've   heard;  and  don't  forget  their  horses!   They  can  see  the
