great Ugl®k will lead us out again.'
'Put  those  Halflings  down!'  ordered  Ugl®k,  taking  no  notice  of
Grishnbkh. 'You, Lugdush, get two others  and stand guard over them! They're
not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As
long  as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and  they're not
to be rescued. Bind their legs!'
The last  part  of  the order was  carried  out mercilessly. But Pippin
found that for the first time he was close to  Merry. The Orcs were making a
great deal of noise,  shouting and  clashing  their weapons, and the hobbits
managed to whisper together for a while.
'I don't think much of this,' said Merry. 'I feel nearly done in. Don't
think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.'
' Lembas!  ' whispered Pippin. '     Lembas:     I've got some. Have  you? I  don't
think they've taken anything but our swords.'
'Yes,  I  had a packet in  my pocket,'  answered Merry, 'but it must be
battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket!'
'You won't have to. I've--'; but just then  a savage kick warned Pippin
that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful.
The night was  cold  and still. All round the knoll on which  the  Orcs
were gathered little watch-fires sprang up,  golden-red  in the  darkness, a
complete ring  of them. They were within a long bowshot.  but the riders did
not  show themselves against  the light,  and the  Orcs wasted  many  arrows
shooting at the  fires, until Ugl®k  stopped them. The riders made no sound.
Later  in the night when the moon came  out of the  mist,  then occasionally
they could be seen, shadowy  shapes that glinted now and again in the  white
light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol.
'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why
don't we get together and charge through? What's old Ugl®k think he's doing,
I should like to know?'
'I daresay you would,' snarled Ugl®k stepping up from behind.  'Meaning
I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the  other rabble: the
maggots and the apes of Lugb®rz. No good trying  to charge with them. They'd
just squeal  and bolt,  and  there  are  more than  enough of  these  filthy
horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat.
'There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets
in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from
all  I've   heard;  and  don't  forget  their  horses!   They  can  see  the
night-breeze,  or  so it's  said. Still  there's  one thing the fine fellows
don't know: Mauh®r and his lads are  in the forest, and they  should turn up
any time now.'
Ugl®k's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy  the Isengarders; but
the  other Orcs  were  both  dispirited  and  rebellious.  They posted a few
watchers,  but  most of them lay  on  the ground,  resting  in the  pleasant
darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the moon passed westward
into thick cloud, and  Pippin could not  see anything  a few feet away.  The
fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders were not, however, content
merely to wait  for  the dawn and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on
the  east side of the  knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that
some of the Men  had ridden in  close, slipped  off their horses, crawled to
the edge of the camp and killed several Orcs, and then had faded away again.
Ugl®k dashed off to stop a stampede.
Pippin  and  Merry sat up.  Their guards,  Isengarders,  had  gone with
Ugl®k. But  if the hobbits  had any thought of escape, it was soon dashed. A
long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew  them close  together.
Dimly they were  aware of  Grishnbkh's great head and hideous  face  between
them; his foul breath  was on their cheeks. He began  to paw  them  and feel
them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down his back.
'Well,  my little  ones!' said Grishnbkh  in a soft whisper.  'Enjoying
your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: swords and whips
on one side, and nasty spears on  the other! Little people should not meddle
_in  affairs that  are too big for them.'  His  fingers continued  to grope.
There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes.
The  thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught direct from
the urgent  thought  of his enemy:  'Grishnbkh  knows about  the  Ring! He's
looking for it, while Ugl®k is busy: he probably wants it for himself.' Cold
fear was in Pippin's heart,  yet at the  same time he was wondering what use
he could make of Grishnbkh's desire.
'I don't think you will find it that way,' he whispered. 'It isn't easy
to find.'
' Find  it? ' said Grishnbkh:  his  fingers  stopped crawling and gripped
Pippin's shoulder. 'Find what? What are you talking about, little one?'. For
a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness he made a noise in
his throat:   gollum, gollum     . 'Nothing, my precious,' he added.
The hobbits felt Grishnbkh's fingers  twitch. 'O ho!' hissed the goblin
softly. 'That's what he means, is it? O  ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little
ones.'
'Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. 'Perhaps;
and not only  for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it,
or not? And what would you give for it?'
'Do I  want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnbkh, as if  puzzled;  but his
arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?'
'We  mean,'  said Pippin, choosing his  words carefully,  'that it's no
good groping in  the dark. We could save you  time and trouble. But you must
untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.'
'My dear tender  little fools,' hissed Grishnbkh, 'everything you have,
and everything you  know, will be got  out of you  in due  time: everything!
You'll wish there was more  that  you could tell to  satisfy the Questioner,
indeed you will:  quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no!  What
do  you think you've  been kept alive  for? My dear  little  fellows, please
believe me when I say that it was  not out of kindness: that's not  even one
of Ugl®k's faults.'
'I find it quite  easy to  believe,' said Merry.  'But you haven't  got
your  prey  home yet. And it doesn't seem to  be going  your  way,  whatever
happens. If we come  to  Isengard,  it won't  be the  great  Grishnbkh  that
benefits: Saruman will take all  that he can find.  If you want anything for
yourself, now's the time to do a deal.'
Grishnbkh  began  to  lose his  temper.  The  name  of  Saruman  seemed
specially  to enrage him.  Time  was passing  and the disturbance was  dying
down. Ugl®k or the Isengarders might return at any minute.
'Have you got it -- either of you?' he snarled.
' Gollum, gollum!    ' said Pippin.
'Untie our legs!' said Merry.
They felt the Orc's arms  trembling violently. 'Curse  you, you  filthy
little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your
bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the  bones? Search  you! I'll cut
you both to quivering shreds. I don't need the help  of your legs to get you
away-and have you all to myself!'
Suddenly  he seized them. The strength in  his  long arms and shoulders
was  terrifying. He  tucked  them one under  each  armpit, and crushed  them
fiercely to his sides; a great stifling hand was clapped  over each of their
mouths. Then he sprang forward,  stooping low. Quickly and silently he went,
