softly. 'That's what he means, is it? O  ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little
ones.'
'Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. 'Perhaps;
and not only  for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it,
or not? And what would you give for it?'
'Do I  want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnbkh, as if  puzzled;  but his
arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?'
'We  mean,'  said Pippin, choosing his  words carefully,  'that it's no
good groping in  the dark. We could save you  time and trouble. But you must
untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.'
'My dear tender  little fools,' hissed Grishnbkh, 'everything you have,
and everything you  know, will be got  out of you  in due  time: everything!
You'll wish there was more  that  you could tell to  satisfy the Questioner,
indeed you will:  quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no!  What
do  you think you've  been kept alive  for? My dear  little  fellows, please
believe me when I say that it was  not out of kindness: that's not  even one
of Ugl®k's faults.'
'I find it quite  easy to  believe,' said Merry.  'But you haven't  got
your  prey  home yet. And it doesn't seem to  be going  your  way,  whatever
happens. If we come  to  Isengard,  it won't  be the  great  Grishnbkh  that
benefits: Saruman will take all  that he can find.  If you want anything for
yourself, now's the time to do a deal.'
Grishnbkh  began  to  lose his  temper.  The  name  of  Saruman  seemed
specially  to enrage him.  Time  was passing  and the disturbance was  dying
down. Ugl®k or the Isengarders might return at any minute.
'Have you got it -- either of you?' he snarled.
' Gollum, gollum!    ' said Pippin.
'Untie our legs!' said Merry.
They felt the Orc's arms  trembling violently. 'Curse  you, you  filthy
little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your
bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the  bones? Search  you! I'll cut
you both to quivering shreds. I don't need the help  of your legs to get you
away-and have you all to myself!'
Suddenly  he seized them. The strength in  his  long arms and shoulders
was  terrifying. He  tucked  them one under  each  armpit, and crushed  them
fiercely to his sides; a great stifling hand was clapped  over each of their
mouths. Then he sprang forward,  stooping low. Quickly and silently he went,
until he  came to the edge  of the knoll. There, choosing a gap  between the
watchers, he passed like an evil shadow out into the  night, down  the slope
and away westward  towards the river that  flowed out of the forest. In that
direction there was a wide open space with only one fire.
After going  a  dozen yards he  halted,  peering and listening. Nothing
could be  seen or heard. He crept  slowly  on, bent almost  double. Then  he
squatted and listened  again. Then he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash.
At that very moment the  dark form of a  rider loomed up  right  in front of
him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called out.
Grishnbkh flung himself on the ground flat,  dragging the hobbits under
him; then he drew his sword.  No doubt he meant to kill his captives, rather
than allow them  to escape or to  be rescued;  but  it  was his undoing. The
sword  rang faintly, and glinted a  little in the light of the fire away  to
his left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed with skill,
or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He dropped the  sword  and
shrieked. There was a quick beat of hoofs, and  even as  Grishnbkh leaped up
and  ran,  he  was ridden down and  a spear  passed through  him.  He gave a
hideous shivering cry and lay still.
The hobbits remained flat on  the  ground, as  Grishnbkh had left them.
Another  horseman came riding swiftly  to his comrade's aid. Whether because
of some special keenness of sight, or because of some other sense, the horse
lifted  and sprang lightly over them; but its rider did  not see them, lying
covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, and too afraid to
move.
At  last  Merry stirred and whispered softly: 'So  far so good: but how
are  we  to avoid being spitted?'
The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnbkh  had  roused
the Orcs. From the yells  and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits
guessed  that their  disappearance had been discovered:  Ugl®k  was probably
knocking  off  a  few  more  heads.  Then suddenly  the answering  cries  of
orc-voices came from the  right, outside the circle of watch-fires, from the
direction of the forest and the mountains. Mauh®r had apparently arrived and
was attacking the besiegers. There was  the sound  of galloping  horses. The
Riders  were  drawing  in  their  ring  close  round the  knoll, risking the
orc-arrows, so as  to prevent any sortie, while a company  rode off to  deal
with the newcomers.  Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized  that without moving
they were now outside the circle: there was nothing between them and escape.
'Now,' said Merry,  'if only we had our legs  and hands free,  we might
get away. But I can't touch the knots, and I can't bite them.'
'No need to  try,'  said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed
to free  my  hands. These loops are only  left for show. You'd better have a
bit of  lembas    first.'
He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes
were broken, but good,  still in their leaf-wrappings. The  hobbits each ate
two  or three  pieces.  The  taste brought  back  to them the memory of fair
faces,  and laughter, and wholesome food in  quiet  days now far away. For a
while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless  of the cries and
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present.
'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnbkh's sword was lying
close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled
forward, and finding the body of the goblin  he  drew from its sheath a long
sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds.
'Now for it!' he said. 'When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be
able  to stand again, and  walk.  But  in any case  we  had better start  by
crawling.'
They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but
it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide  berth,  and
wormed their way  forward bit  by  bit, until  they came to the edge  of the
river, gurgling away in  the black shadows under its deep  banks. Then  they
looked back.
The sounds  had  died away.  Evidently  Mauh®r  and his 'lads' had been
killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil.
It would not last very much longer. Already  the night was old. In the East,
which had remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale.
'We must get under cover,' said  Pippin, 'or we  shall be seen. It will
not  be any  comfort  to us, if  these riders discover that we are  not Orcs
after we are dead.' He got up and stamped his feet. 'Those cords have cut me
like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What
about you, Merry?'
Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can  manage it.           Lembas     does put  heart
into  you! A more  wholesome sort  of  feeling, too, than  the heat  of that
orc-draught.  I  wonder  what it was made of. Better not to  know, I expect.
Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!'
'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!'
