'Now,' said Merry,  'if only we had our legs  and hands free,  we might
get away. But I can't touch the knots, and I can't bite them.'
'No need to  try,'  said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed
to free  my  hands. These loops are only  left for show. You'd better have a
bit of  lembas    first.'
He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes
were broken, but good,  still in their leaf-wrappings. The  hobbits each ate
two  or three  pieces.  The  taste brought  back  to them the memory of fair
faces,  and laughter, and wholesome food in  quiet  days now far away. For a
while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless  of the cries and
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present.
'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnbkh's sword was lying
close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled
forward, and finding the body of the goblin  he  drew from its sheath a long
sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds.
'Now for it!' he said. 'When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be
able  to stand again, and  walk.  But  in any case  we  had better start  by
crawling.'
They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but
it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide  berth,  and
wormed their way  forward bit  by  bit, until  they came to the edge  of the
river, gurgling away in  the black shadows under its deep  banks. Then  they
looked back.
The sounds  had  died away.  Evidently  Mauh®r  and his 'lads' had been
killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil.
It would not last very much longer. Already  the night was old. In the East,
which had remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale.
'We must get under cover,' said  Pippin, 'or we  shall be seen. It will
not  be any  comfort  to us, if  these riders discover that we are  not Orcs
after we are dead.' He got up and stamped his feet. 'Those cords have cut me
like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What
about you, Merry?'
Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can  manage it.           Lembas     does put  heart
into  you! A more  wholesome sort  of  feeling, too, than  the heat  of that
orc-draught.  I  wonder  what it was made of. Better not to  know, I expect.
Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!'
'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!'
They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river.
Behind them the light grew in the East. As they  walked they compared notes,
talking  lightly in  hobbit-fashion of the things  that  had happened  since
their capture. No listener would have guessed from their words that they had
suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope towards torment
and death; or that even now, as they knew  well,  they had  little chance of
ever finding friend or safety again.
'You seem to  have been doing well, Master Took,' said Merry. 'You will
get  almost  a chapter in old Bilbo's book, if ever I get a chance to report
to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain's little game, and
playing up to him. But I wonder if anyone will  ever pick up your trail  and
find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid  yours is gone
for good.
'I  shall have  to brush up my  toes,  if I am to  get level  with you.
Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is where he comes in. I
don't  suppose  you have much notion  where we are;  but I spent  my time at
Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end
of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.'
Even as he spoke the dark edge of the  forest loomed up straight before
them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees, creeping away
from the coming Dawn.
'Lead on, Master  Brandybuck!' said Pippin. 'Or lead back! We have been
warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.'
'I have  not,' answered Merry; 'but the forest seems better to  me, all
the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.'
He  led the way  in under the  huge branches  of  the trees. Old beyond
guessing, they  seemed. Great  trailing  beards of lichen  hung  from  them,
blowing and swaying in  the breeze. Out of the  shadows the  hobbits peeped,
gazing back down the slope: little  furtive  figures  that in the  dim light
looked like elf-children  in the deeps  of time peering out of the Wild Wood
in wonder at their first Dawn.
Far  over the  Great  River,  and the  Brown  Lands,  leagues upon grey
leagues away, the Dawn came,  red as flame.  Loud rang the hunting-horns  to
greet it.  The Riders of Rohan sprang suddenly  to life. Horn  answered horn
again.
Merry and  Pippin heard,  clear  in  the  cold  air,  the  neighing  of
war-horses, and  the  sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was lifted,
an  arc of  fire,  above the margin of the world. Then with a great  cry the
Riders charged from  the East; the red  light gleamed on mail and spear. The
Orcs yelled  and shot all the arrows that remained to  them. The hobbits saw
several horsemen fall; but their line held on up  the hill  and over it, and
wheeled round and charged  again. Most  of the raiders that were  left alive
then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But
one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the
direction  of  the  forest.  Straight up the slope they charged  towards the
watchers. Now they were drawing near,  and it seemed certain that they would
escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way.
'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Ugl®k! I don't want to
meet him again.' The hobbits turned and  fled deep into the  shadows of  the
wood.
So it  was  that  they did not sec  the  last  stand,  when  Ugl®k  was
overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he was slain
at last by Jomer,  the Third Marshal  of the Mark, who dismounted and fought
him  sword to sword.  And over  the  wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted
down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly.
Then when they had  laid their fallen comrades in a  mound and had sung
their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of their
enemies.  So ended  the raid, and no  news  of  it came ever back either  to
Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of  the burning rose high to heaven and
was seen by many watchful eyes.
