an  arc of  fire,  above the margin of the world. Then with a great  cry the
Riders charged from  the East; the red  light gleamed on mail and spear. The
Orcs yelled  and shot all the arrows that remained to  them. The hobbits saw
several horsemen fall; but their line held on up  the hill  and over it, and
wheeled round and charged  again. Most  of the raiders that were  left alive
then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But
one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the
direction  of  the  forest.  Straight up the slope they charged  towards the
watchers. Now they were drawing near,  and it seemed certain that they would
escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way.
'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Ugl®k! I don't want to
meet him again.' The hobbits turned and  fled deep into the  shadows of  the
wood.
So it  was  that  they did not sec  the  last  stand,  when  Ugl®k  was
overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he was slain
at last by Jomer,  the Third Marshal  of the Mark, who dismounted and fought
him  sword to sword.  And over  the  wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted
down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly.
Then when they had  laid their fallen comrades in a  mound and had sung
their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of their
enemies.  So ended  the raid, and no  news  of  it came ever back either  to
Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of  the burning rose high to heaven and
was seen by many watchful eyes.
Chapter 4. Treebeard
Meanwhile the hobbits went with  as much speed as  the dark and tangled
forest allowed, following  the line of the  running  stream, westward and up
towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper into  Fangorn. Slowly
their fear of the Orcs died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling
feeling came  over  them,  as  if the air were  too thin or too  scanty  for
breathing.
At last Merry halted.  'We can't go on like this,' he  panted.  'I want
some air.'
'Let's have  a  drink  at any rate,'  said  Pippin. 'I'm  parched.'  He
clambered on to a  great tree-root that  wound  down  into the  stream,  and
stooping drew up some water in his cupped hands. It was clear and  cold, and
he  took many draughts.  Merry followed  him.  The water refreshed them  and
seemed  to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink of
the  stream,  dabbling  their  sore feet and legs, and peering round at  the
trees that  stood silently about them, rank upon rank, until they faded away
into grey twilight in every direction.
'I suppose you  haven't  lost us already?'  said  Pippin,  leaning back
against  a great tree-trunk.  'We  can  at  least follow the  course of this
stream, the Entwash or whatever you call  it, and get  out again  the way we
came.'
'We could, if  our legs  would  do it,' said  Merry;  'and if  we could
breathe properly.'
'Yes, it is  all  very  dim,  and stuffy,  in  here,' said Pippin.  'It
reminds me, somehow, of the  old room in the  Great Place of  the Tooks away
back in the  Smials at Tuckborough:  a huge place,  where  the furniture has
never been moved or changed for generations. They say  the Old Took lived in
it  year  after  year,  while  he  and  the  room  got  older  and  shabbier
together-and  it has  never changed since  he  died, a century ago.  And Old
Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that  puts it back a bit. But that
is  nothing  to the old feeling of  this  wood.  Look at  all those weeping,
trailing,  beards and whiskers of lichen! And  most of the trees seem  to be
half covered with ragged dry  leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can't
imagine what spring  would look  like here, if  it ever comes; still  less a
spring-cleaning.'
'But the Sun at any  rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does
not look or feel at all like Bilbo's  description of Mirkwood.  That was all
dark and black,  and the home  of dark black  things. This is just dim,  and
frightfully  tree-ish.  You  can't imagine          animals     living here  at all,  or
staying for long.'
'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying
to get through  it  either.  Nothing to cat  for a  hundred  miles, I should
guess. How are our supplies?'
'Low,'  said Merry.  'We ran  off  with nothing but a  couple of  spare
packets  of     lembas   , and  left everything else behind.' They  looked at what
remained of the  elven-cakes:  broken  fragments for about five meagre days,
that  was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry.  'We shall be cold
tonight, whichever way we go.'
'Well, we'd  better decide on  the way now,' said  Pippin. 'The morning
must be getting on.'
Just then they became  aware of a yellow light that  had appeared, some
way further  on into the  wood: shafts  of sunlight seemed  suddenly to have
pierced the forest-roof.
'Hullo!' said Merry.  'The Sun must have run into a cloud  while  we've
been under these  trees, and now she  has  run  out  again; or  else she has
climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far let's go
and investigate!'
They  found  it was  further than  they thought. The  ground was rising
steeply  still,  and  it was becoming  increasingly stony.  The  light  grew
broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock-wall before
them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of  some long root thrust out by
the distant mountains.  No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on
its stony face. The twigs of the trees at  its foot were stretched out stiff
and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where  all had looked so shabby
and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the
smooth
black-greys  of bark  like polished leather.  The boles of the trees  glowed
with a soft green like young grass: early spring or  a fleeting vision of it
was about them.
In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural
perhaps, and  made by the weathering  and splitting  of the rock, for it was
rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest-trees, there
