'But the Sun at any  rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does
not look or feel at all like Bilbo's  description of Mirkwood.  That was all
dark and black,  and the home  of dark black  things. This is just dim,  and
frightfully  tree-ish.  You  can't imagine          animals     living here  at all,  or
staying for long.'
'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying
to get through  it  either.  Nothing to cat  for a  hundred  miles, I should
guess. How are our supplies?'
'Low,'  said Merry.  'We ran  off  with nothing but a  couple of  spare
packets  of     lembas   , and  left everything else behind.' They  looked at what
remained of the  elven-cakes:  broken  fragments for about five meagre days,
that  was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry.  'We shall be cold
tonight, whichever way we go.'
'Well, we'd  better decide on  the way now,' said  Pippin. 'The morning
must be getting on.'
Just then they became  aware of a yellow light that  had appeared, some
way further  on into the  wood: shafts  of sunlight seemed  suddenly to have
pierced the forest-roof.
'Hullo!' said Merry.  'The Sun must have run into a cloud  while  we've
been under these  trees, and now she  has  run  out  again; or  else she has
climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far let's go
and investigate!'
They  found  it was  further than  they thought. The  ground was rising
steeply  still,  and  it was becoming  increasingly stony.  The  light  grew
broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock-wall before
them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of  some long root thrust out by
the distant mountains.  No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on
its stony face. The twigs of the trees at  its foot were stretched out stiff
and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where  all had looked so shabby
and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the
smooth
black-greys  of bark  like polished leather.  The boles of the trees  glowed
with a soft green like young grass: early spring or  a fleeting vision of it
was about them.
In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural
perhaps, and  made by the weathering  and splitting  of the rock, for it was
rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest-trees, there
was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at
its edge, and  one old stump of a tree  with only two bent branches left: it
looked almost  like the figure  of some gnarled  old  man,  standing  there,
blinking in the morning-light.
'Up  we go!' said Merry joyfully. 'Now for a breath of air, and a sight
of the land!'
They climbed  and scrambled up the rock. If the  stair had been made it
was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were  too eager to  be
surprised at the  remarkable  way  in  which the  cuts  and  sores of  their
captivity  had healed and their  vigour had returned. They came at length to
the edge  of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they sprang
up  and  turned  round  with their backs  to the  hill, breathing  deep, and
looking  out eastward. They saw  that they had  only come some three or four
miles  into the  forest:  the heads  of the  trees marched  down  the slopes
towards the  plain. There, near the fringe  of  the forest,  tall spires  of
curling black smoke went up, wavering and floating towards them.
'The wind's changing,'  said Merry.  'It's  turned east again. It feels
cool up here.'
'Yes,'  said Pippin; 'I'm  afraid this is only a passing  gleam, and it
will  all go grey  again. What a  pity! This  shaggy  old  forest  looked so
different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.'
'Almost felt you liked the  Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind
of you,' said  a strange voice.  'Turn round and let  me have a look at your
faces. I almost feel that  I dislike you  both, but do  not let us be hasty.
Turn round!' A large knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders,
and they  were twisted round,  gently but irresistibly; then  two great arms
lifted them up.
They  found that they  were looking  at a  most extraordinary face.  It
belonged to a  large  Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen
foot high,  very sturdy, with a tall  head,  and hardly any neck. Whether it
was clad in stuff like green  and grey  bark, or  whether that was its hide,
was  difficult to say. At any  rate the  arms, at a short distance from  the
trunk, were not wrinkled,  but covered  with a brown smooth skin.  The large
feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a
sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy  at the roots,  thin and mossy  at
the  ends. But  at  the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes.  These
deep  eyes  were now  surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating.
They were brown, shot  with a green light. Often  afterwards Pippin tried to
describe his first impression of them.
'One felt  as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with
ages of  memory  and long, slow,  steady  thinking;  but  their surface  was
sparkling with  the present: like sun shimmering on the  outer  leaves of  a
vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake.  I don't know but it  felt
as  if  something  that grew  in the  ground-asleep, you might say, or  just
feeling itself  as  something between  roof-tip  and leaf-tip, between  deep
earth  and sky had suddenly waked up, and was  considering you with the same
slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.'
' Hrum, Hoom     ,'  murmured  the  voice,  a deep  voice  like a  very  deep
woodwind  instrument. 'Very odd indeed! Do  not  be hasty, that is my motto.
But if I had seen you,  before I heard your voices-I liked them: nice little
voices: they reminded me of something I cannot  remember---if I had seen you
before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little
Orcs, and found out my mistake  afterwards. Very odd  you  are, indeed. Root
and twig, very odd!'
Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he
felt a curious suspense, but  not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And
what are you?'
A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells
were covered over. '      Hrum   , now,' answered the voice;  'well,  I am an Ent, or
that's  what  they call me.  Yes, Ent is the word.            The   Ent, I am,  you might
say,  in your  manner  of  speaking.          Fangorn     is  my name according to  some,
Treebeard      others make it.    Treebeard     will do.'
'An  Ent ?' said  Merry.  'What's  that? But  what do you  call yourself?
What's your real name?'
'Hoo now!' replied  Treebeard. 'Hoo! Now that would be  telling! Not so
I
hasty.  And   am doing the  asking. You are  in              my   country. What are      you  ,  I
wonder? I cannot place you. You do not  seem to come in the old lists that I
learned when I was young. But  that was a long, long time ago, and  they may
have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did it go?
Learn now the lore of Living Creatures!
First name the four, the free peoples:
Eldest of all, the elf-children;
Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses;
Ent the earthborn, old as mountains;
