They were brown, shot  with a green light. Often  afterwards Pippin tried to
describe his first impression of them.
'One felt  as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with
ages of  memory  and long, slow,  steady  thinking;  but  their surface  was
sparkling with  the present: like sun shimmering on the  outer  leaves of  a
vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake.  I don't know but it  felt
as  if  something  that grew  in the  ground-asleep, you might say, or  just
feeling itself  as  something between  roof-tip  and leaf-tip, between  deep
earth  and sky had suddenly waked up, and was  considering you with the same
slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.'
' Hrum, Hoom     ,'  murmured  the  voice,  a deep  voice  like a  very  deep
woodwind  instrument. 'Very odd indeed! Do  not  be hasty, that is my motto.
But if I had seen you,  before I heard your voices-I liked them: nice little
voices: they reminded me of something I cannot  remember---if I had seen you
before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little
Orcs, and found out my mistake  afterwards. Very odd  you  are, indeed. Root
and twig, very odd!'
Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he
felt a curious suspense, but  not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And
what are you?'
A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells
were covered over. '      Hrum   , now,' answered the voice;  'well,  I am an Ent, or
that's  what  they call me.  Yes, Ent is the word.            The   Ent, I am,  you might
say,  in your  manner  of  speaking.          Fangorn     is  my name according to  some,
Treebeard      others make it.    Treebeard     will do.'
'An  Ent ?' said  Merry.  'What's  that? But  what do you  call yourself?
What's your real name?'
'Hoo now!' replied  Treebeard. 'Hoo! Now that would be  telling! Not so
I
hasty.  And   am doing the  asking. You are  in              my   country. What are      you  ,  I
wonder? I cannot place you. You do not  seem to come in the old lists that I
learned when I was young. But  that was a long, long time ago, and  they may
have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did it go?
Learn now the lore of Living Creatures!
First name the four, the free peoples:
Eldest of all, the elf-children;
Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses;
Ent the earthborn, old as mountains;
Man the mortal, master of horses:
Hm, hm, hm.
Beaver the builder, buck the leaper,
Bear bee-hunter, boar the fighter;
Hound is hungry, hare is fearful...
hm, hm.
Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture,
Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest
Swan the whitest, serpent coldest...
Hoom, hm; hoom. hm. how did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty toom
tum.
It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere!'
'We  always seem  to have got  left out of the  old lists, and the  old
stories,' said  Merry.  'Yet we've been about for quite a long  time.  We're
hobbits   .'
'Why not make a new line?' said Pippin.
'Half-grown hobbits, the hole-dwellers.
Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got
it.'
'Hm! Not bad, not bad,' said Treebeard.  'That would do. So you live in
holes, eh? It  sounds very right and proper. Who calls  you                 hobbits  , though?
That does not sound elvish to me. Elves made all  the old  words: they began
it.'
'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,' said Pippin.
'Hoom, hmm! Come  now!  Not so hasty!  You call                   yourselves    hobbits? But
you should not go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out your own right
names if you're not careful.'
'We aren't careful about  that,' said Merry. 'As a matter of fact I'm a
Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.'
'And I'm a Took, Peregrin Took,  but  I'm generally called  Pippin,  or
even Pip.'
'Hm, but you     are  hasty folk, I see,' said Treebeard. 'I  am honoured by
your confidence; but you should not be too free all at once.  There are Ents
and  Ents, you know; or there  are Ents and things that look like  Ents  but
ain't, as you  might say. I'll call you  Merry and Pippin if you please-nice
names. For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.' A queer
half-knowing,  half-humorous look came with  a green flicker into his  eyes.
'For one thing it would  take a long while: my name is growing all the time,
and I've lived a  very  long, long time; so          my    name is like  a story.  Real
names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the
Old  Entish  as you might say. It is a lovely  language, but it takes a very
long  time to say  anything in it, because  we do  not  say anything  in it.
unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to.
'But  now,' and  the  eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to
grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is  going  on? What are you doing in it
all? I can see and hear  (     and   smell  and   feel) a great deal from  this,  from
this, from this     a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-bur®ml                 . Excuse me: that
is a part of my name for it; I do not know what  the word is  in the outside
languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine
mornings, and  think about  the Sun, and the grass beyond the wood,  and the
horses, and the clouds, and the  unfolding of the world. What  is going  on?
What is Gandalf up  to? And these --            burbrum    ,' he made a deep rumbling noise
like a discord on a great organ --  'these Orcs, and young Saruman  down  at
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.'
'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry:  'and even if we tried  to
be quick, it  would  take a  long time to tell.  But you  told  us not to be
hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we
asked what you are  going to do with us, and  which side you are on? And did
you know Gandalf?'
'Yes, I do know  him: the only wizard that really cares  about  trees '
said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?'
'Yes,'  said Pippin  sadly, 'we did. He  was a great friend, and he was
our guide.'
'Then I  can answer your other  questions,' said  Treebeard. 'I  am not
to
going to do anything        with  you: not if you mean by that 'do something   you'
without your  leave. We might  do  some things together. I don't  know about
sides  . I go my own way; but your way may go along with mine for a while. But
you speak of Master  Gandalf,  as if he was  in a story that had come  to an
end.'
'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I
am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.'
'Hoo,  come  now!'  said  Treebeard.  'Hoom, hm, ah  well.'  He paused,
looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come
now!'
