'For one thing it would  take a long while: my name is growing all the time,
and I've lived a  very  long, long time; so          my    name is like  a story.  Real
names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the
Old  Entish  as you might say. It is a lovely  language, but it takes a very
long  time to say  anything in it, because  we do  not  say anything  in it.
unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to.
'But  now,' and  the  eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to
grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is  going  on? What are you doing in it
all? I can see and hear  (     and   smell  and   feel) a great deal from  this,  from
this, from this     a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-bur®ml                 . Excuse me: that
is a part of my name for it; I do not know what  the word is  in the outside
languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine
mornings, and  think about  the Sun, and the grass beyond the wood,  and the
horses, and the clouds, and the  unfolding of the world. What  is going  on?
What is Gandalf up  to? And these --            burbrum    ,' he made a deep rumbling noise
like a discord on a great organ --  'these Orcs, and young Saruman  down  at
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.'
'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry:  'and even if we tried  to
be quick, it  would  take a  long time to tell.  But you  told  us not to be
hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we
asked what you are  going to do with us, and  which side you are on? And did
you know Gandalf?'
'Yes, I do know  him: the only wizard that really cares  about  trees '
said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?'
'Yes,'  said Pippin  sadly, 'we did. He  was a great friend, and he was
our guide.'
'Then I  can answer your other  questions,' said  Treebeard. 'I  am not
to
going to do anything        with  you: not if you mean by that 'do something   you'
without your  leave. We might  do  some things together. I don't  know about
sides  . I go my own way; but your way may go along with mine for a while. But
you speak of Master  Gandalf,  as if he was  in a story that had come  to an
end.'
'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I
am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.'
'Hoo,  come  now!'  said  Treebeard.  'Hoom, hm, ah  well.'  He paused,
looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come
now!'
'If you  would like to hear more. said Merry, 'we will tell you. But it
will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us  down? Couldn't we sit here
together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us
up.'
'Hm,  tired ? No. I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do not
is
sit down. I am not very. hm, bendable. But there.  the  Sun   going in. Let
us leave this -- did you say what you call it?'
'Hill?' suggested Pippin. 'Shelf? Step?' suggested Merry.
Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. '            Hill . Yes, that was it. But
it is a hasty word  for  a thing that has stood here ever since this part of
the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it, and go.'
'Where shall we go?' asked Merry.
'To my home, or one of my homes,' answered Treebeard.
'Is it far?'
'I do not  know.  You might  call it far, perhaps.  But what does  that
matter?'
'Well,  you see, we have lost all our belongings,' said Merry. 'We have
only a little food.'
'O!  Hm! You need not  trouble about that,' said Treebeard. 'I can give
you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long, long while. And
if we decide to part company, I can  set you down outside my  country at any
point you choose. Let us go!'
Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one  in  the crook of each  arm,
Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the  other, and moved them
to the  edge  of  the  shelf. The  rootlike  toes grasped  the  rocks.  Then
carefully  and solemnly, he  stalked down from step to step, and reached the
floor of the Forest.
At once he set off with  long  deliberate strides  through  the  trees,
deeper  and  deeper into  the  wood, never  far  from  the  stream, climbing
steadily up  towards  the slopes of the mountains. Many of the  trees seemed
asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that merely passed by;
but  some quivered, and some  raised up  their branches above his head as he
approached.  All  the  while, as he walked, he  talked to  himself in a long
running stream of musical sounds.
The hobbits  were silent for some time. They  felt, oddly  enough, safe
and  comfortable, and they had a great deal  to think and wonder  about.  At
last Pippin ventured to speak again.
'Please, Treebeard,' he said,  'could I  ask  you  something?  Why  did
Celeborn  warn  us  against  your forest?  He  told us  not to  risk getting
entangled in it.'
'Hmm,  did he now?' rumbled  Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the
same, if you had been going the other way. Do  not risk getting entangled in
the  woods of      Laurelindurenan       ! That  is what the Elves used to call it, but
now they  make the  name  shorter: Lothlurien they call it. Perhaps they are
right: maybe it is fading;  not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold,
that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is
a queer  place, and  not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that
you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not
happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land.
'And  so is  this. Folk have  come  to grief here. Aye, they  have,  to
grief.   Laurelindurenan lindelorendor malinornjlion ornemalin                   ,' he hummed to
himself. 'They are falling rather  behind  the world in  there, I guess,' he
said 'Neither  this country, nor anything else  outside the Golden  Wood, is
what it was when Celeborn was young. Still:
Taurelilumla-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurla Lumlanor,                    1
that is what  they used to say.  Things have  changed, but it is  still
true in places.'
'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?'
'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that
goes  on myself, so I cannot explain it  to  you. Some of us are  still true
Ents, and  lively enough  in our fashion, but many are growing sleepy, going
tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are just trees, of course; but
many are half  awake. Some  are quite wide awake, and a  few are,  well, ah,
well getting    Entish  . That is going on all the time.
'When that happens to  a  tree,  you find that  some have  bad  hearts.
Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old
willows  down  the Entwash, gone  long ago,  alas!  They were  quite hollow,
indeed  they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and  sweet-spoken as a
young  leaf.  And  then  there are  some  trees  in  the  valleys  under the
mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through.  That sort of thing seems
to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There
are still some very black patches.'
'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry.
'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some
