friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.'
Suddenly he  stopped as if  listening.  Frodo became aware that all was
very quiet,  inside and  outside. Gandalf  crept to one side of  the window.
Then with  a  dart he  sprang to  the sill,  and thrust a  long arm out  and
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head
hauled by
one ear.
'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now what
may you be doing?'
'Lor bless  you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!' said Sam. 'Nothing! Leastways I was
just  trimming the grass-border  under  the window,  if you  follow me.'  He
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.
'I don't,' said Gandalf grimly. It is some time  since I last heard the
sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?'
'Eavesdropping,  sir? I don't  follow you, begging  your pardon.  There
ain't no eaves at Bag End, and that's a fact.'
'Don't be  a  fool! What  have  you  heard,  and why  did you  listen?'
Gandalf's eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.
'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't
let  him turn  me  into anything unnatural!  My old  dad would take on so. I
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!'
'He  won't hurt you,' said Frodo,  hardly able to keep  from  laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'He knows, as well as I
do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight
away!'
'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn't
rightly  understand,  about an  enemy, and  rings, and  Mr. Bilbo, sir,  and
dragons, and a  fiery mountain, and - and  Elves, sir. I listened because  I
couldn't help  myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless  me, sir, but I do
love tales of  that sort. And  I believe  them  too,  whatever Ted may  say.
Elves,  sir! I  would dearly love  to see         them.   Couldn't you take  me to see
Elves, sir, when you go?'
Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'Come  inside!' he shouted,  and  putting out
both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all,
right through the window and stood him on the floor. 'Take you to see Elves,
eh?' he  said, eyeing Sam  closely, but with a smile flickering on his face.
'So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?'
'I  did,  sir.  And that's why I choked:  which  you heard seemingly. I
tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.'
'It can't be  helped, Sam,' said  Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized
that  flying  from the Shire  would mean  more painful partings than  merely
saying farewell  to  the familiar comforts of Bag End. 'I shall have to  go.
But' - and  here he looked  hard at Sam  - 'if you really care about me, you
will keep that    dead    secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of
what you've heard here, then  I  hope  Gandalf will turn you into a  spotted
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes.'
Sam fell on his knees,  trembling. 'Get  up, Sam!' said Gandalf. I have
thought of something better than  that. Something  to shut your  mouth,  and
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!'
'Me,  sir!' cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.  'Me
go and see Elves and all! Hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears.
Chapter 3. Three is Company
'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to  go soon,' said Gandalf. Two
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made  no sign of getting ready to
go.
'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanish
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.'
'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all!
I said  soon,   not  instantly.  If  you can think of any way of slipping out  of
the  Shire  without  its  being generally known, it will  be  worth a little
delay. But you must not delay too long.'
'What  about the  autumn, on  or after  Our Birthday?' asked  Frodo. 'I
think I could probably make some arrangements by then.'
To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come
to  the  point. Bag End seemed a more  desirable residence than  it  had for
years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the
Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think
more kindly  of journeying, as it always did at that season. He  had  indeed
privately made up his mind to leave on his  fiftieth birthday:  Bilbo's  one
hundred and twenty-eighth. It  seemed somehow the proper day on which to set
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and  the  one
thing  that made the thought  of leaving  bearable. He  thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in  the end. But he did
not tell all his  thoughts to Gandalf. What the  wizard  guessed  was always
difficult to tell.
He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that will
do -  but  it must not  be any  later. I  am getting  very anxious.  In  the
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going!
And  see  that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him
into a toad.'
'As for   where I   am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be  difficult to give
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.'
'Don't be absurd!' said Gandalf. 'I  am not warning you against leaving
an  address  at the post-office!  But you are leaving the  Shire  - and that
should not be known,  until you  are far away. And  you must go, or at least
