'Please, Treebeard,' he said,  'could I  ask  you  something?  Why  did
Celeborn  warn  us  against  your forest?  He  told us  not to  risk getting
entangled in it.'
'Hmm,  did he now?' rumbled  Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the
same, if you had been going the other way. Do  not risk getting entangled in
the  woods of      Laurelindurenan       ! That  is what the Elves used to call it, but
now they  make the  name  shorter: Lothlurien they call it. Perhaps they are
right: maybe it is fading;  not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold,
that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is
a queer  place, and  not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that
you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not
happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land.
'And  so is  this. Folk have  come  to grief here. Aye, they  have,  to
grief.   Laurelindurenan lindelorendor malinornjlion ornemalin                   ,' he hummed to
himself. 'They are falling rather  behind  the world in  there, I guess,' he
said 'Neither  this country, nor anything else  outside the Golden  Wood, is
what it was when Celeborn was young. Still:
Taurelilumla-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurla Lumlanor,                    1
that is what  they used to say.  Things have  changed, but it is  still
true in places.'
'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?'
'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that
goes  on myself, so I cannot explain it  to  you. Some of us are  still true
Ents, and  lively enough  in our fashion, but many are growing sleepy, going
tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are just trees, of course; but
many are half  awake. Some  are quite wide awake, and a  few are,  well, ah,
well getting    Entish  . That is going on all the time.
'When that happens to  a  tree,  you find that  some have  bad  hearts.
Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old
willows  down  the Entwash, gone  long ago,  alas!  They were  quite hollow,
indeed  they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and  sweet-spoken as a
young  leaf.  And  then  there are  some  trees  in  the  valleys  under the
mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through.  That sort of thing seems
to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There
are still some very black patches.'
'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry.
'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some
shadow of the Great Darkness  lying there still away north; and bad memories
are handed down. But there are hollow dales in this land where the  Darkness
has never been lifted, and the trees are older  than I am. Still, we do what
we can. We keep off strangers and the  foolhardy; and we train and we teach,
we walk and we weed.
'We are tree-herds, we old  Ents. Few  enough of us are left now. Sheep
get  like shepherd, and shepherds like  sheep, it is said;  but  slowly, and
neither have  long in the world. It  is quicker and  closer with  trees  and
Ents, and they walk down the  ages  together. For Ents are more like  Elves:
less interested  in  themselves than Men are,  and  better at getting inside
other things.  And yet again  Ents are more like Men,  more  changeable than
Elves are, and  quicker at taking the colour of the outside,  you might say.
Or  better than both:  for they are steadier and keep their  minds on things
longer. 'Some of my kin look just  like trees now, and need something  great
to  rouse them; and they speak  only in whispers. But  some  of my trees are
limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of course, waking trees
up  and  teaching  them to speak and  learning their  tree-talk. They always
wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did. But then the Great Darkness
came, and they passed away  over the Sea, or fled into far  valleys, and hid
themselves,  and made  songs  about days that would never come again.  Never
again. Aye,  aye, there was all  one wood once upon a time: from here to the
Mountains of Lune, and this was just the East End.
'Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing all day
and  hear no more  than  the echo of my own  voice in the hollow hills.  The
woods were like the woods of Lothlurien. only thicker stronger, younger. And
the smell of the air! I used to spend a week just breathing.'
Treebeard  fell silent, striding along, and yet  making  hardly a sound
with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed into a murmuring
chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was chanting to them:
In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring.
Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion!
And I said that was good.
I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand.
Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir!
And I thought that was best.
To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn.
Ah!  the  gold and the red  and the sighing of leaves  in the Autumn in
Taur-na-neldor!
It was more than my desire.
To the pine-trees upon the  highland of  Dorthonion  I climbed  in  the
Winter.
Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black  branches  of  Winter upon
Orod-na-Thfn!
My voice went up and sang in the sky.
And now all those lands lie under the wave.
And I walk in Ambaruna, in Tauremorna, in Aldaluml.
In my own land, in the country of Fangorn,
Where the roots are long,
And the years lie thicker than the leaves
In Tauremornaluml.
He  ended, and strode on silently, and in all  the wood, as far  as ear
could reach, there was not a sound.
The day  waned,  and dusk was twined about  the boles of  the trees. At
last  the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had
come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras.
Down the hillside the young Entwash,  leaping  from its springs  high above,
ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there
was  a long slope, clad with grass, now  grey in the twilight. No trees grew
there  and  it  was  open  to  the sky;  stars were shining already in lakes
between shores of cloud.
Treebeard  strode  up the slope,  hardly  slackening his pace. Suddenly
before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one
on  either side, like living gate-posts; but  there was  no gate  save their
crossing and interwoven boughs. As  the old Ent approached, the trees lifted
up their branches, and all  their leaves quivered and rustled. For they were
evergreen trees, and their leaves were dark and polished, and gleamed in the
twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great
hall had been cut  in the side of the hill. On either hand the  walls sloped
upwards, until they were fifty feet high  or more, and along each wall stood
an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.
At the far end the rock-wall was sheer,  but at  the bottom it had been
hollowed back into a  shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of  the
hall, save the branches  of  the trees, which  at the inner end overshadowed
all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream
