Taur-na-neldor!
It was more than my desire.
To the pine-trees upon the  highland of  Dorthonion  I climbed  in  the
Winter.
Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black  branches  of  Winter upon
Orod-na-Thfn!
My voice went up and sang in the sky.
And now all those lands lie under the wave.
And I walk in Ambaruna, in Tauremorna, in Aldaluml.
In my own land, in the country of Fangorn,
Where the roots are long,
And the years lie thicker than the leaves
In Tauremornaluml.
He  ended, and strode on silently, and in all  the wood, as far  as ear
could reach, there was not a sound.
The day  waned,  and dusk was twined about  the boles of  the trees. At
last  the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had
come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras.
Down the hillside the young Entwash,  leaping  from its springs  high above,
ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there
was  a long slope, clad with grass, now  grey in the twilight. No trees grew
there  and  it  was  open  to  the sky;  stars were shining already in lakes
between shores of cloud.
Treebeard  strode  up the slope,  hardly  slackening his pace. Suddenly
before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one
on  either side, like living gate-posts; but  there was  no gate  save their
crossing and interwoven boughs. As  the old Ent approached, the trees lifted
up their branches, and all  their leaves quivered and rustled. For they were
evergreen trees, and their leaves were dark and polished, and gleamed in the
twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great
hall had been cut  in the side of the hill. On either hand the  walls sloped
upwards, until they were fifty feet high  or more, and along each wall stood
an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.
At the far end the rock-wall was sheer,  but at  the bottom it had been
hollowed back into a  shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of  the
hall, save the branches  of  the trees, which  at the inner end overshadowed
all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream
escaped from  the springs above,  and leaving the main  water, fell tinkling
down  the  sheer face  of the wall, pouring in silver  drops,  like  a  fine
curtain  in front  of the arched bay. The water was  gathered  again into  a
stone basin in the floor between the trees, and thence it spilled and flowed
away beside the open path, out  to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through
the forest.
'Hm! Here we are!' said Treebeard, breaking his  long silence.  'I have
brought you about  seventy  thousand  ent-strides, but what that comes to in
the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow we are near the roots  of
the  Last Mountain.  Part of the name of this place might be Wellinghall, if
it were turned into your language. I like it. We will stay here tonight.' He
set them  down  on  the  grass  between  the aisles  of the  trees, and they
followed  him  towards the great arch. The  hobbits  now  noticed that as he
walked his  knees  hardly bent, but  his  legs opened in  a great stride. He
planted  his big toes (and they  were indeed  big, and very  broad)  on  the
ground first, before any other part of his feet.
For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling  spring, and
took a deep breath;  then he laughed, and passed inside. A great stone table
stood there, but  no chairs. At  the back of the  bay  it was already  quite
dark. Treebeard lifted two  great  vessels and stood them on the table. They
seemed to  be  filled with water;  but he  held  his  hands over  them,  and
immediately they began to glow,  one with a golden and the other with a rich
green light; and  the blending of the two lights lit the bay; as  if the sun
of  summer  was  shining through a roof of young  leaves. Looking back,  the
hobbits saw that the trees in  the court had also begun to glow,  faintly at
first, but steadily quickening, until  every leaf was edged with light: some
green,  some gold, some red as  copper; while  the  tree-trunks  looked like
pillars moulded out of luminous stone.
'Well, well, now we can talk again,' said Treebeard. 'You are thirsty I
expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!' He went to the  back of the
bay, and  then they saw that several tall stone jars stood there, with heavy
lids. He removed  one of the lids, and dipped  in a great ladle, and with it
filled three bowls, one very large bowl, and two smaller ones.
'This is an ent-house,' he said, 'and there are no seats, I  fear.  But
you may sit on the table.'  Picking  up the hobbits he set them on the great
stone  slab, six feet  above the  ground, and there they  sat dangling their
legs, and drinking in sips.
The  drink was  like water, indeed very like  the taste of the draughts
they had drunk from the  Entwash near, the borders  of the  forest,  and yet
there was  some scent or savour in  it which they could not describe: it was
faint, but it reminded them of  the smell of a distant wood borne  from afar
by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the  draught began at the toes, and
rose  steadily  through every limb, bringing  refreshment  and vigour  as it
coursed upwards, right to the tips of the hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that
the  hair  on  their heads was actually standing up,  waving and curling and
growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet  in the basin beyond  the
arch, and then he  drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow  draught.
The hobbits thought he would never stop.
At last he  set the bowl down again. 'Ah -- ah,' he sighed. 'Hm,  hoom,
now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and  I will lie down; that
will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.'
On the right side of  the  bay there  was a great bed on low legs;  not
more than a couple of feet high,  covered  deep in dried grass  and bracken.
Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of
bending at his  middle),  until he lay at full  length, with his arms behind
his head, looking up at the ceiling. upon which lights were flickering, like
the  play of leaves  in the sunshine. Merry  and Pippin  sat  beside him  on
pillows of grass.
'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard.
The hobbits began to tell him the story of their  adventures ever since
they left Hobbiton. They followed  no very clear order, for they interrupted
one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the  speaker, and  went
back to some earlier point, or  jumped forward asking questions  about later
events. They said  nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why
they set  out or  where they  were going to;  and he  did not  ask  for  any
reasons.
He  was  immensely interested in  everything: in  the  Black Riders, in
Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and  Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of
Moria, and in Lothlurien  and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and
its country over and over  again. He  said an odd thing at  this point. 'You
never see any, hm, any Ents round  there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents,
Entwives     I should really say.'
' Entwives ?' said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?'
Yes,  hm,  well   no:  I  do  not  really  know   now,  said  Treebeard
