The  drink was  like water, indeed very like  the taste of the draughts
they had drunk from the  Entwash near, the borders  of the  forest,  and yet
there was  some scent or savour in  it which they could not describe: it was
faint, but it reminded them of  the smell of a distant wood borne  from afar
by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the  draught began at the toes, and
rose  steadily  through every limb, bringing  refreshment  and vigour  as it
coursed upwards, right to the tips of the hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that
the  hair  on  their heads was actually standing up,  waving and curling and
growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet  in the basin beyond  the
arch, and then he  drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow  draught.
The hobbits thought he would never stop.
At last he  set the bowl down again. 'Ah -- ah,' he sighed. 'Hm,  hoom,
now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and  I will lie down; that
will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.'
On the right side of  the  bay there  was a great bed on low legs;  not
more than a couple of feet high,  covered  deep in dried grass  and bracken.
Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of
bending at his  middle),  until he lay at full  length, with his arms behind
his head, looking up at the ceiling. upon which lights were flickering, like
the  play of leaves  in the sunshine. Merry  and Pippin  sat  beside him  on
pillows of grass.
'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard.
The hobbits began to tell him the story of their  adventures ever since
they left Hobbiton. They followed  no very clear order, for they interrupted
one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the  speaker, and  went
back to some earlier point, or  jumped forward asking questions  about later
events. They said  nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why
they set  out or  where they  were going to;  and he  did not  ask  for  any
reasons.
He  was  immensely interested in  everything: in  the  Black Riders, in
Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and  Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of
Moria, and in Lothlurien  and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and
its country over and over  again. He  said an odd thing at  this point. 'You
never see any, hm, any Ents round  there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents,
Entwives     I should really say.'
' Entwives ?' said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?'
Yes,  hm,  well   no:  I  do  not  really  know   now,  said  Treebeard
thoughtfully. 'But they would like your country, so I just wondered.'
Treebeard  was  however   especially  interested   in  everything  that
concerned Gandalf;  and  most  interested of  all  in Saruman's  doings. The
hobbits  regretted  very much that  they  knew so little  about them: only a
rather  vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told  the Council.  But they
were clear  at  any rate that  Ugl®k and  his troop  came from Isengard, and
spoke of Saruman as their master.
'Hm, hoom!'  said  Treebeard,  when at last  their story  had wound and
wandered  down to the battle of the Orcs  and  the Riders  of Rohan.  'Well,
well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me  all, no
indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you are  doing as Gandalf
would wish. There is something very  big going on, that I can see, and  what
it is maybe I shall learn  in good time, or in bad time. By  root  and twig,
but  it  is a strange business: up sprout a  little folk that are not in the
old lists,  and behold  the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and
Gandalf takes them  on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras
Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the  leagues  of Wilderland:  indeed
they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!'
'And what about yourself?' asked Merry.
'Hoom, hm, I have not troubled  about the  Great Wars,' said Treebeard;
'they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wizards: Wizards
are always troubled  about the future.  I  do not like  worrying  about  the
future. I am not  altogether on anybody's            side , because nobody is altogether
on my     side , if you understand me: nobody cares  for the woods as I care for
them, not even  Elves nowadays. Still,  I take more kindly to Elves than  to
others: it was the Elves that cured us of  dumbness long ago, and that was a
great gift that cannot be forgotten, though our  ways have parted since. And
there are  some things, of  course, whose side I am altogether                 not   on; I am
against  them altogether: these -- burbrum' (he again  made a deep rumble of
disgust)' -- these Orcs, and their masters.
'I  used to  be  anxious  when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when  it
removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while: Mordor is a long way away.
But it seems that the wind is setting  East,  and the withering of all woods
may  be  drawing near.  There is naught that an old Ent can  do to hold back
that storm: he must weather it or crack.
'But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook him. I must
do something. I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I should do about
Saruman.'
'Who is  Saruman?'  asked  Pippin.  'Do  you know  anything  about  his
history?'  'Saruman is  a  Wizard,' answered Treebeard.  'More  than  that I
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They  appeared first after
the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with  the Ships  I never
can tell. Saruman was  reckoned great among them.  I  believe.  He  gave  up
wandering  about and minding the  affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago --
you would call it a very long time ago: and he settled down at Angrenost, or
Isengard  as the Men of Rohan call  it. He was very quiet to begin with, but
his fame began to grow. He was  chosen to be head of the White Council, they
say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now  if even  then Saruman
was not turning to evil ways. But at any  rate he used to give no trouble to
his neighbours. I used to talk to him.  There was a time when  he was always
walking about my woods. He was polite in  those days, always asking my leave
(at  least when he  met me); and always  eager  to  listen. I told him  many
things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me
in like kind. I  cannot remember that he ever told.  me anything. And he got
more and more like that; his face, as I remember  it-I  have not seen it for
many  a  day-became  like windows  in  a stone  wall: windows with  shutters
inside.
'I think  that I now understand  what he is  up  to. He  is plotting to
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels;  and he does not care for
growing things, except as far as they serve him for the  moment.  And now it
is clear that he is a  black traitor. He has taken up  with  foul folk, with
the Orcs. Brm,  hoom! Worse than that: he  has been doing something to them;
something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a
mark of evil things that came in the Great  Darkness  that they cannot abide
the Sun;  but Saruman's  Orcs  can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder
what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of
Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!'
Treebeard  rumbled for a moment, as if he  were pronouncing some  deep,
subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some  time ago I began to wonder  how Orcs
dared to pass  through my woods so  freely,'  he went on. 'Only lately did I
guess that  Saruman was to blame, and that  long ago he had been spying  out
all the ways, and discovering  my secrets. He and his  foul folk are  making
havoc now. Down on the borders  they are  felling  trees-good trees. Some of
the trees they just cut down and leave to rot -- orc-mischief that; but most
