Saruman.'
'Who is  Saruman?'  asked  Pippin.  'Do  you know  anything  about  his
history?'  'Saruman is  a  Wizard,' answered Treebeard.  'More  than  that I
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They  appeared first after
the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with  the Ships  I never
can tell. Saruman was  reckoned great among them.  I  believe.  He  gave  up
wandering  about and minding the  affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago --
you would call it a very long time ago: and he settled down at Angrenost, or
Isengard  as the Men of Rohan call  it. He was very quiet to begin with, but
his fame began to grow. He was  chosen to be head of the White Council, they
say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now  if even  then Saruman
was not turning to evil ways. But at any  rate he used to give no trouble to
his neighbours. I used to talk to him.  There was a time when  he was always
walking about my woods. He was polite in  those days, always asking my leave
(at  least when he  met me); and always  eager  to  listen. I told him  many
things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me
in like kind. I  cannot remember that he ever told.  me anything. And he got
more and more like that; his face, as I remember  it-I  have not seen it for
many  a  day-became  like windows  in  a stone  wall: windows with  shutters
inside.
'I think  that I now understand  what he is  up  to. He  is plotting to
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels;  and he does not care for
growing things, except as far as they serve him for the  moment.  And now it
is clear that he is a  black traitor. He has taken up  with  foul folk, with
the Orcs. Brm,  hoom! Worse than that: he  has been doing something to them;
something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a
mark of evil things that came in the Great  Darkness  that they cannot abide
the Sun;  but Saruman's  Orcs  can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder
what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of
Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!'
Treebeard  rumbled for a moment, as if he  were pronouncing some  deep,
subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some  time ago I began to wonder  how Orcs
dared to pass  through my woods so  freely,'  he went on. 'Only lately did I
guess that  Saruman was to blame, and that  long ago he had been spying  out
all the ways, and discovering  my secrets. He and his  foul folk are  making
havoc now. Down on the borders  they are  felling  trees-good trees. Some of
the trees they just cut down and leave to rot -- orc-mischief that; but most
are hewn up and carried off to feed  the fires of Orthanc. There is always a
smoke rising from Isengard these days.
'Curse  him, root and branch!  Many  of those  trees  were  my  friends
creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their  own that
are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump  and bramble where once
there were singing groves. I have been idle. I have let things slip. It must
stop!'
Treebeard raised  himself  from  his  bed  with a jerk,  stood  up, and
thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and sent up two
jets  of  flame.  There  was a flicker like green fire in his  eyes, and his
beard stood out stiff as a great besom.
'I will  stop it!' he boomed. 'And  you shall come  with me. You may be
able  to help me. You will be helping your own friends that way, too; for if
Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well
as
in front. Our roads go together -- to Isengard!'
'We will come with you,' said Merry. 'We will do what we can.'
'Yes!' said  Pippin. 'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I
should like  to be there, even if I could not  be of much use: I shall never
forget Ugl®k and the crossing of Rohan.'
'Good! Good!'  said  Treebeard. 'But I spoke  hastily. We must  not  be
hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it is easier
to shout   stop ! than to do it.'
He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain
of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever the  drops of
water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted like red and green
sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed again and was silent.
After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring  again. He seemed to be
counting  on his fingers. 'Fangorn,  Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,' he sighed.
'The trouble is  that there are so  few of us left,' he said turning towards
the hobbits. 'Only  three remain of the first Ents that walked in the  woods
before  the  Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and  Finglas  and Fladrif -- to
give them their Elvish names; you may call them Leaflock and Skinbark if you
like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for
this business. Leaflock has grown sleepy. almost tree-ish, you might say: he
has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the
deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He
used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been  too drowsy to walk  far
even then.  Skinbark  lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is
where the worst  trouble  has been. He was wounded by the Orcs,  and many of
his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up
into the high places, among the birches that he loves  best, and he will not
come down. Still,  I  daresay I  could get  together a fair company  of  our
younger folks-if  I could make  them understand the  need: if I could  rouse
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity there are so few of us!'
'Why are there so few  when  you  have  lived in this country so long?'
asked Pippin. 'Have a great many died?'
'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None  have died from  inside, as  you  might
say. Some have  fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and
more have  grown tree-ish. But  there were never many of us and we have  not
increased. There have been no Entings -- no children, you would say, not for
a terrible long count of years. You see, we lost the Entwives.'
'How very sad!' said Pippin. 'How was it that they all died?'
'They did not    die !' said Treebeard. 'I never said       died  . We lost them, I
said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk
knew that. There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung
among  Elves  and  Men  from  Mirkwood  to  Gondor.  They  cannot  be  quite
forgotten.'
'Well, I  am  afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to
the Shire,'  said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the
songs?'
'Yes, I will indeed,' said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request.
'But  I  cannot  tell it properly, only in short; and then  we  must end our
talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey
to begin.'
'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When
the  world  was young, and the woods were  wide  and wild,  the Ents and the
Entwives  --  and  there  were  Entmaidens  then:  ah!   the  loveliness  of
Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the  lightfooted, in the days of our  youth! -- they
walked  together  and they  housed together.  But our  hearts did not  go on
growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in
the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents
loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills;
and they drank of the mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees
