used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been  too drowsy to walk  far
even then.  Skinbark  lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is
where the worst  trouble  has been. He was wounded by the Orcs,  and many of
his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up
into the high places, among the birches that he loves  best, and he will not
come down. Still,  I  daresay I  could get  together a fair company  of  our
younger folks-if  I could make  them understand the  need: if I could  rouse
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity there are so few of us!'
'Why are there so few  when  you  have  lived in this country so long?'
asked Pippin. 'Have a great many died?'
'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None  have died from  inside, as  you  might
say. Some have  fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and
more have  grown tree-ish. But  there were never many of us and we have  not
increased. There have been no Entings -- no children, you would say, not for
a terrible long count of years. You see, we lost the Entwives.'
'How very sad!' said Pippin. 'How was it that they all died?'
'They did not    die !' said Treebeard. 'I never said       died  . We lost them, I
said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk
knew that. There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung
among  Elves  and  Men  from  Mirkwood  to  Gondor.  They  cannot  be  quite
forgotten.'
'Well, I  am  afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to
the Shire,'  said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the
songs?'
'Yes, I will indeed,' said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request.
'But  I  cannot  tell it properly, only in short; and then  we  must end our
talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey
to begin.'
'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When
the  world  was young, and the woods were  wide  and wild,  the Ents and the
Entwives  --  and  there  were  Entmaidens  then:  ah!   the  loveliness  of
Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the  lightfooted, in the days of our  youth! -- they
walked  together  and they  housed together.  But our  hearts did not  go on
growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in
the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents
loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills;
and they drank of the mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees
let fall in their path;  and they learned of  the Elves and  spoke  with the
Trees. But  the Entwives gave their  minds to the  lesser trees, and to  the
meads in the sunshine  beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe
in the thicket, and  the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring, and
the green herbs in the waterlands in summer, and the seeding grasses in  the
autumn  fields. They  did  not desire  to  speak with these things; but they
wished  them to  hear and obey what was said to  them. The  Entwives ordered
them to  grow  according to  their wishes, and bear leaf and fruit to  their
liking; for the Entwives desired order, and plenty, and peace (by which they
meant that things should remain  where they had set them).  So the  Entwives
made gardens to live in. But  we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to
the gardens  now and again. Then when the  Darkness came  in  the North, the
Entwives crossed  the Great  River, and made new  gardens,  and  tilled  new
fields, and  we saw  them more seldom. After the Darkness was overthrown the
land of the Entwives blossomed richly,  and their  fields were full of corn.
Many men learned the crafts of  the  Entwives and honoured them greatly; but
we were only a legend to them, a secret in the heart of the forest. Yet here
we still are,  while  all  the gardens of the Entwives are  wasted: Men call
them the Brown Lands now.
'I remember it was  long ago --  in the time of  the war between Sauron
and the Men of the Sea -- desire came over me to see Fimbrethil  again. Very
fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen her, though  little like
the  Entmaiden  of old.  For  the Entwives were bent  and  browned  by their
labour; their hair  parched  by the sun to the hue  of ripe corn  and  their
cheeks  like  red apples.  Yet their eyes were still  the eyes  of  our  own
people.  We  crossed  over Anduin and came to  their  land:  but  we found a
desert: it was all  burned and uprooted, for war had passed over it. But the
Entwives were not there. Long  we called, and long we searched; and we asked
all  folk  that  we  met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had
never seen them;  and  some said that they had seen them walking  away west,
and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that we went could we find
them. Our sorrow was very great. Yet the wild  wood called, and we  returned
to it. For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the
Entwives.  walking far and wide and  calling  them by their beautiful names.
But as time passed we went  more  seldom and  wandered less far. And now the
Entwives are only a memory for us, and our  beards  are  long and  grey. The
Elves made many songs concerning the Search of  the  Ents,  and some of  the
songs passed into the tongues of  Men. But we made  no songs about it, being
content to chant  their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives.  We
believe that we may meet again in  a time to come, and perhaps we shall find
somewhere  a  land where we can live together and both be content. But it is
foreboded  that that will only be  when we have  both  lost all  that we now
have.  And  it may  well be that that time is  drawing near at last. For  if
Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely  to wither
all the woods.
'There  was  an Elvish  song  that  spoke  of this, or at  least  so  I
understand  it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never
an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But
we  know it by heart, and  hum it now and again. This is how it runs in your
tongue:
ENT.
When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough;
When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow;
When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain-air,
Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair!
entwife.
When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade;
When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid;
When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air,
I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair.
ent.
When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold
Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold;
When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West,
Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best!
entwife.
When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown;
When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town;
When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West,
I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best!
