songs passed into the tongues of  Men. But we made  no songs about it, being
content to chant  their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives.  We
believe that we may meet again in  a time to come, and perhaps we shall find
somewhere  a  land where we can live together and both be content. But it is
foreboded  that that will only be  when we have  both  lost all  that we now
have.  And  it may  well be that that time is  drawing near at last. For  if
Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely  to wither
all the woods.
'There  was  an Elvish  song  that  spoke  of this, or at  least  so  I
understand  it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never
an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But
we  know it by heart, and  hum it now and again. This is how it runs in your
tongue:
ENT.
When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough;
When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow;
When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain-air,
Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair!
entwife.
When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade;
When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid;
When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air,
I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair.
ent.
When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold
Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold;
When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West,
Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best!
entwife.
When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown;
When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town;
When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West,
I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best!
ent.
When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay;
When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day;
When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain
I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to thee again!
entwife.
When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at last;
When broken is the barren bough, and light and labour past;
I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again:
Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain!
both.
Together we will take the road that leads into the West,
And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest.'
Treebeard ended  his song.  'That  is  how it goes,'  he  said.  'It is
Elvish, of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I daresay it is
fair  enough. But the Ents could say  more on their side,  if they had time!
But now I am going to stand  up  and  take  a little sleep.  Where  will you
stand?'
'We usually  lie down to  sleep,' said Merry.  'We  shall  be all right
where we are.'
'Lie down to sleep!' said Treebeard. 'Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I
was  forgetting:  singing that song  put  me in mind  of  old times;  almost
thought that I was talking to young Entings, I did. Well, you can lie on the
bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good night!'
Merry  and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass
and fern. It was fresh,  and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights died  down,
and the glow of the trees faded; but outside  under  the arch they could see
old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his arms raised above his head. The
bright stars peered out of the sky, and lit the falling water as  it spilled
on to his fingers  and head,  and  dripped, dripped, in  hundreds  of silver
drops on to  his  feet. Listening to the tinkling of  the drops  the hobbits
fell asleep.
They  woke to find a cool sun  shining into the great court, and on  to
the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running on a stiff
easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were
bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard him humming and  singing, as he
came up the path between the trees.
'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw
them.
'You  sleep long. I have  been many a hundred  strides already today. Now we
will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.'
He  poured  them  out two  full bowls  from a  stone  jar;  but  from a
different jar. The taste was not the same  as it  had been the night before:
it was earthier and  richer, more sustaining and  food-like,  so  to  speak.
While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of  the bed, and nibbling small
pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a  necessary part
of breakfast than  because they  felt  hungry), Treebeard stood,  humming in
Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky.
'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask.
'Hoo, eh? Entmoot?' said Treebeard, turning round. 'It is not a  place,
it  is a  gathering of Ents --  which does not often happen nowadays.  But I
have  managed  to make a fair number  promise to come.  We shall meet in the
place  where we have always met: Derndingle  Men  call it.  It is away south
from here. We must be there before noon.'
Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the  hobbits in his arms as
on the previous day. At  the entrance to  the court he turned  to the right,
stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along  the feet of great
tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets
of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods.  Soon
Treebeard
turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves,  where the
trees were  larger, taller, and  thicker  than any that the hobbits had ever
seen before. For a  while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they
had  noticed when  they  first ventured into Fangorn,  but it  soon  passed.
Treebeard  did   not  talk  to  them.  He   hummed  to  himself  deeply  and
thoughtfully,  but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded  like
boom, boom, rumboom, boorar, boom, boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar
boom   ,  and
so on with  a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought
they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound, that seemed to come out of
the earth, or  from boughs above  their heads, or perhaps  from the boles of
