easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were
bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard him humming and  singing, as he
came up the path between the trees.
'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw
them.
'You  sleep long. I have  been many a hundred  strides already today. Now we
will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.'
He  poured  them  out two  full bowls  from a  stone  jar;  but  from a
different jar. The taste was not the same  as it  had been the night before:
it was earthier and  richer, more sustaining and  food-like,  so  to  speak.
While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of  the bed, and nibbling small
pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a  necessary part
of breakfast than  because they  felt  hungry), Treebeard stood,  humming in
Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky.
'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask.
'Hoo, eh? Entmoot?' said Treebeard, turning round. 'It is not a  place,
it  is a  gathering of Ents --  which does not often happen nowadays.  But I
have  managed  to make a fair number  promise to come.  We shall meet in the
place  where we have always met: Derndingle  Men  call it.  It is away south
from here. We must be there before noon.'
Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the  hobbits in his arms as
on the previous day. At  the entrance to  the court he turned  to the right,
stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along  the feet of great
tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets
of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods.  Soon
Treebeard
turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves,  where the
trees were  larger, taller, and  thicker  than any that the hobbits had ever
seen before. For a  while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they
had  noticed when  they  first ventured into Fangorn,  but it  soon  passed.
Treebeard  did   not  talk  to  them.  He   hummed  to  himself  deeply  and
thoughtfully,  but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded  like
boom, boom, rumboom, boorar, boom, boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar
boom   ,  and
so on with  a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought
they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound, that seemed to come out of
the earth, or  from boughs above  their heads, or perhaps  from the boles of
the trees; but Treebeard did not stop or turn his head to either side.
They had been going for a  long while -- Pippin had tried to keep count
of the 'ent-strides' but had failed, getting lost at about three thousand --
when  Treebeard  began to  slacken his pace. Suddenly he  stopped,  put  the
hobbits down, and raised his curled  hands to his mouth so that they  made a
hollow tube; then he blew or called through them. A great                  hoom, hom      rang out
like a deep-throated horn in the woods, and seemed  to echo  from the trees.
Far off there came from  several directions  a similar               hoom, hom, hoom         that
was not an echo but an answer.
Treebeard  now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders  and strode on
again, every now and then sending out another horn-call,  and each time  the
answers came louder and nearer. In this way they came at last to what looked
like an impenetrable  wall of dark evergreen trees, trees of a kind that the
hobbits had never seen  before:  they branched out right from the roots, and
were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly, and  they bore
many stiff upright flower-spikes with large shining olive-coloured buds.
Turning to the  left and skirting this huge hedge  Treebeard  came in a
few strides to a  narrow entrance. Through it a  worn path passed  and dived
suddenly down  a long steep slope. The hobbits saw that they were descending
into a great  dingle, almost as round as a bowl, very wide and deep, crowned
at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge. It  was smooth and  grassclad
inside,  and  there were no  trees  except  three  very tall  and  beautiful
silver-birches that stood at the  bottom  of the bowl.  Two  other paths led
down into the dingle: from the west and from the east.
Several Ents had already arrived.  More were coming  in down the  other
paths, and  some were now following Treebeard. As they drew near the hobbits
gazed  at them.  They had expected to see a number of creatures as much like
Treebeard as  one hobbit is like another (at any  rate to a stranger's eye);
and they were very much surprised to see nothing of the  kind. The Ents were
as different from  one another as trees from trees: some as different as one
tree  is  from  another of the  same  name  but  quite  different growth and
history; and some as different  as one tree-kind from another, as birch from
beech; oak from fir. There were a few older Ents,  bearded and gnarled  like
hale  but  ancient trees (though none looked  as ancient as Treebeard);  and
there   were  tall  strong  Ents,   clean-limbed  and  smooth-skinned   like
forest-trees  in  their  prime; but  there were no young Ents, no  saplings.
Altogether there were about two  dozen standing on the wide grassy  floor of
the dingle, and as many more were marching in.
At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety  that they
saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth; and height, and
length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes  and fingers (anything from
three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded
them of beech-trees  or oaks. But  there were other kinds. Some recalled the
chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick
legs. Some recalled  the  ash:  tall straight grey  Ents  with many-fingered
hands and long legs; some  the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch,
the  rowan, and the linden.  But when the Ents all gathered round Treebeard,
bowing their  heads  slightly, murmuring in  their  slow musical voices, and
looking long  and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw  that they
were all of the same kindred, and all had  the same eyes: not all so old  or
so  deep  as Treebeard's,  but  all  with the  same slow, steady, thoughtful
expression, and the same green flicker.
As soon as the  whole company was assembled,  standing in a wide circle
round  Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation began.  The Ents
began to murmur slowly: first  one joined and then  another, until they were
all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one
side  of  the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom  on  the
other  side. Though he could not catch or  understand any of the words -- he
supposed the language was Entish -- Pippin found the  sound very pleasant to
listen to at first;  but gradually his attention wavered.  After a long time
(and the  chant showed no signs  of  slackening) he found himself wondering,
since  Entish  was  such  an 'unhasty'  language,  whether they had yet  got
further than    Good Morning       ; and if  Treebeard  was to call the roll, how many
days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for
yes  or  no ,' he thought. He yawned.
Treebeard  was immediately  aware  of him. '             Hm, ha, hey    , my Pippin!' he
said,  and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk,  I
was forgetting; and anyway it is  wearisome listening to a speech you do not
understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot,
and
they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and  that  a
new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that
is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry  can stroll about in the dingle,
if you like.  There is  a well of  good water, if you  need refreshing, away
