the dingle, and as many more were marching in.
At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety  that they
saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth; and height, and
length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes  and fingers (anything from
three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded
them of beech-trees  or oaks. But  there were other kinds. Some recalled the
chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick
legs. Some recalled  the  ash:  tall straight grey  Ents  with many-fingered
hands and long legs; some  the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch,
the  rowan, and the linden.  But when the Ents all gathered round Treebeard,
bowing their  heads  slightly, murmuring in  their  slow musical voices, and
looking long  and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw  that they
were all of the same kindred, and all had  the same eyes: not all so old  or
so  deep  as Treebeard's,  but  all  with the  same slow, steady, thoughtful
expression, and the same green flicker.
As soon as the  whole company was assembled,  standing in a wide circle
round  Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation began.  The Ents
began to murmur slowly: first  one joined and then  another, until they were
all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one
side  of  the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom  on  the
other  side. Though he could not catch or  understand any of the words -- he
supposed the language was Entish -- Pippin found the  sound very pleasant to
listen to at first;  but gradually his attention wavered.  After a long time
(and the  chant showed no signs  of  slackening) he found himself wondering,
since  Entish  was  such  an 'unhasty'  language,  whether they had yet  got
further than    Good Morning       ; and if  Treebeard  was to call the roll, how many
days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for
yes  or  no ,' he thought. He yawned.
Treebeard  was immediately  aware  of him. '             Hm, ha, hey    , my Pippin!' he
said,  and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk,  I
was forgetting; and anyway it is  wearisome listening to a speech you do not
understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot,
and
they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and  that  a
new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that
is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry  can stroll about in the dingle,
if you like.  There is  a well of  good water, if you  need refreshing, away
yonder in the north bank.  There are still  some  words  to speak before the
Moot really begins.  I will come  and see you again, and tell you how things
are going.'
He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed  low. This
feat  seemed  to amuse  the Ents very much, to judge by the  tone  of  their
murmurs, and the flicker of their  eyes; but they soon turned  back to their
own  business. Merry  and Pippin  climbed up the path that came in from  the
west, and looked  through the opening in the  great  hedge.  Long  tree-clad
slopes  rose  from  the  lip of  the dingle, and away beyond them, above the
fir-trees of the furthest  ridge there rose, sharp and white, the peak of  a
high  mountain.  Southwards to their left they could see the forest  falling
away  down  into  the  grey distance. There far  away there was a pale green
glimmer that Merry guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan.
'I wonder where Isengard is?' said Pippin.
'I  don't  know quite where  we are,'  said  Merry;  'but that peak  is
probably Methedras. and as far  as I can remember the  ring of Isengard lies
in a  fork or deep cleft  at the end of the  mountains. It  is probably down
behind this  great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze over there, left
of the peak, don't you think?'
'What  is Isengard like?' said Pippin. 'I wonder what Ents can do about
it anyway.'  'So do I,' said Merry.  'Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or
hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock  in
the  middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has  a tower  on  it. There  is a gate,
perhaps  more  than  one, in the encircling wall,  and I  believe there is a
stream running  through it; it  comes  out  of  the  mountains, and flows on
across the Gap  of  Rohan. It does not seem the  sort  of place for  Ents to
tackle.  But I  have an odd feeling  about these Ents: somehow I don't think
they are quite as safe and, well funny as  they seem. They seem slow, queer,
and  patient, almost  sad; and yet I believe  they            could   be roused.  If that
happened, I would rather not be on the other side.'
'Yes!' said  Pippin.  'I  know  what you mean.  There might be  all the
difference between an old cow sitting and  thoughtfully chewing, and a  bull
charging; and the change might come  suddenly.  I wonder  if  Treebeard will
rouse them. I am sure he means to  try.  But they don't like  being  roused.
Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.'
The hobbits turned back.  The voices of the Ents were still  rising and
falling in their  conclave. The sun had now risen high  enough to look  over
the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of  the birches and lit the northward
side of the  dingle  with  a  cool yellow  light.  There they  saw  a little
glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet
of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again,
and  not to  be in a hurry-and then they climbed down  to the gushing water.
They drank a little,  a clean, cold, sharp  draught, and sat down on a mossy
stone,  watching the  patches of  sun  on the grass and the shadows  of  the
sailing clouds passing over the  floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents
went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and
far from everything  that had ever  happened  to  them. A great longing came
over them for the faces and voices of their companions. especially for Frodo
and Sam, and for Strider.
At last there came  a pause in the  Ent-voices; and looking up they saw
Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side.
'Hm, hoom, here I am again,' said Treebeard. 'Are you getting weary, or
feeling  impatient,  hmm,  eh? Well, I  am  afraid  that  you  must  not get
impatient yet. We have finished the first stage now; but I have still got to
explain things again to those that live a  long  way off, far from Isengard,
and those that I could not get round to before the Moot, and  after that  we
shall have to decide  what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take
Ents so  long as going over all the facts  and events that they have to make
up their  minds  about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long
time yet: a couple of  days very likely. So I  have brought you a companion.
He  has an ent-house nearby.  Bregalad  is his  Elvish name. He says  he has
already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he
is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought  to get on together.
Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them.
Bregalad  stood for some  time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they
looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was
tall, and seemed to be one of the  younger Ents;  he had smooth shining skin
on  his arms and legs; his lips  were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He
could bend and  sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last  he spoke, and
his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's.
'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go  for a walk!' he said. 'I  am Bregalad,
that  is Quickbeam in your language. But it is only  a  nickname, of course.
They have called me that ever since I said             yes  to an elder Ent before he had
finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still
