the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of  the birches and lit the northward
side of the  dingle  with  a  cool yellow  light.  There they  saw  a little
glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet
of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again,
and  not to  be in a hurry-and then they climbed down  to the gushing water.
They drank a little,  a clean, cold, sharp  draught, and sat down on a mossy
stone,  watching the  patches of  sun  on the grass and the shadows  of  the
sailing clouds passing over the  floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents
went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and
far from everything  that had ever  happened  to  them. A great longing came
over them for the faces and voices of their companions. especially for Frodo
and Sam, and for Strider.
At last there came  a pause in the  Ent-voices; and looking up they saw
Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side.
'Hm, hoom, here I am again,' said Treebeard. 'Are you getting weary, or
feeling  impatient,  hmm,  eh? Well, I  am  afraid  that  you  must  not get
impatient yet. We have finished the first stage now; but I have still got to
explain things again to those that live a  long  way off, far from Isengard,
and those that I could not get round to before the Moot, and  after that  we
shall have to decide  what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take
Ents so  long as going over all the facts  and events that they have to make
up their  minds  about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long
time yet: a couple of  days very likely. So I  have brought you a companion.
He  has an ent-house nearby.  Bregalad  is his  Elvish name. He says  he has
already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he
is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought  to get on together.
Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them.
Bregalad  stood for some  time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they
looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was
tall, and seemed to be one of the  younger Ents;  he had smooth shining skin
on  his arms and legs; his lips  were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He
could bend and  sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last  he spoke, and
his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's.
'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go  for a walk!' he said. 'I  am Bregalad,
that  is Quickbeam in your language. But it is only  a  nickname, of course.
They have called me that ever since I said             yes  to an elder Ent before he had
finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still
wetting their beards. Come with me!'
He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long-fingered hand to  each
of  the hobbits. All that day  they  walked  about in  the  woods with  him,
singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam  often  laughed. He laughed if the  sun
came out from  behind  a cloud, he laughed  if  they came upon a  stream  or
spring: then  he stooped  and  splashed  his  feet  and head with water;  he
laughed sometimes  at some sound or whisper in  the trees. Whenever he saw a
rowan-tree he halted a  while  with  his  arms stretched out,  and sang, and
swayed as he sang.
At  nightfall  he  brought  them to his ent-house:  nothing more than a
mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew in a circle
about it, and there was water  (as in all ent-houses), a spring bubbling out
from the bank. They  talked for a while as darkness fell on  the forest. Not
far away  the voices of  the Entmoot  could be heard still going on; but now
they seemed deeper and less  leisurely,  and every  now  and again one great
voice would rise in a high and  quickening music,  while all the others died
away.  But beside them Bregalad  spoke gently  in their  own  tongue, almost
whispering; and they learned that  he belonged to Skinbark's people, and the
country where they had lived had been ravaged. That  seemed  to the  hobbits
quite enough to explain his 'hastiness', at least in the matter of Orcs.
'There were rowan-trees in my home,'  said Bregalad,  softly and sadly,
'rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many years ago in the
quiet of the  world. The  oldest were planted by the Ents to try  and please
the Entwives;  but  they looked at them and smiled and  said  that they knew
where  whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing. Yet there are no  trees
of all  that race, the people of the Rose, that are  so beautiful to me. And
these trees grew and grew, till the  shadow of each  was like a  green hall,
and  their red  berries in the  autumn  were  a burden,  and a beauty  and a
wonder. Birds used to flock there. I like birds, even when they chatter; and
the  rowan has enough  and  to  spare. But  the birds became  unfriendly and
greedy  and tore at the trees, and threw  the fruit down and did not eat it.
Then  Orcs came  with axes and cut down my trees. I came  and called them by
their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear or answer: they
lay dead.
O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril!
O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay!
O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer's day,
Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft:
Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft!
O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey;
Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day.
O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril!
The hobbits  fell asleep to the sound of  the soft singing of Bregalad,
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved.
The next day they spent also in his company,  but they  did not  go far
from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter  of the
bank; for  the wind was colder, and  the clouds closer and greyer; there was
little sunshine,  and in the  distance the voices  of  the Ents at the  Moot
still  rose  and  fell, sometimes  loud  and strong, sometimes low  and sad,
sometimes  quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge. A  second night
came and  still  the  Ents  held conclave under hurrying  clouds  and fitful
stars.
The third day broke, bleak and windy.  At sunrise the Ents' voices rose
to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind
fell  and  the  air grew  heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could  see that
Bregalad  was now listening intently, although to them,  down in the dell of
his ent-house, the sound of the Moot was faint.
The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains. sent
out  long  yellow beams  between the  cracks  and  fissures of  the  clouds.
Suddenly they were aware  that  everything was very quiet; the  whole forest
stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent-voices had stopped.  What did
that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards
towards Derndingle.
Then with  a crash came  a great ringing shout:              ra-hoom-rah!      The trees
quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was another pause, and
then a  marching  music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats
and booms there welled voices singing high and strong.
We come, we come with roll of drum: ta-runda runda runda rom!
The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song:
We come, we come with horn and drum: ta-ryna ryna ryna rom!
Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house.
Before  long  they  saw the  marching  line approaching: the Ents  were
swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. Treebeard was
at  their head,  and  some  fifty followers  were  behind him,  two abreast,
