Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft:
Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft!
O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey;
Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day.
O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril!
The hobbits  fell asleep to the sound of  the soft singing of Bregalad,
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved.
The next day they spent also in his company,  but they  did not  go far
from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter  of the
bank; for  the wind was colder, and  the clouds closer and greyer; there was
little sunshine,  and in the  distance the voices  of  the Ents at the  Moot
still  rose  and  fell, sometimes  loud  and strong, sometimes low  and sad,
sometimes  quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge. A  second night
came and  still  the  Ents  held conclave under hurrying  clouds  and fitful
stars.
The third day broke, bleak and windy.  At sunrise the Ents' voices rose
to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind
fell  and  the  air grew  heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could  see that
Bregalad  was now listening intently, although to them,  down in the dell of
his ent-house, the sound of the Moot was faint.
The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains. sent
out  long  yellow beams  between the  cracks  and  fissures of  the  clouds.
Suddenly they were aware  that  everything was very quiet; the  whole forest
stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent-voices had stopped.  What did
that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards
towards Derndingle.
Then with  a crash came  a great ringing shout:              ra-hoom-rah!      The trees
quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was another pause, and
then a  marching  music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats
and booms there welled voices singing high and strong.
We come, we come with roll of drum: ta-runda runda runda rom!
The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song:
We come, we come with horn and drum: ta-ryna ryna ryna rom!
Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house.
Before  long  they  saw the  marching  line approaching: the Ents  were
swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. Treebeard was
at  their head,  and  some  fifty followers  were  behind him,  two abreast,
keeping step with their feet  and beating time  with  their hands upon their
flanks. As they drew near the flash and flicker of their eyes could be seen.
'Hoom, hom! Here we  come with a  boom, here  we come at last!'  called
Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad  and the hobbits. 'Come, join the
Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!'
'To Isengard!' the Ents cried in many voices.
'To Isengard!'
To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone;
Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone,
We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door;
For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars -- we go to war!
To land of gloom with tramp  of doom, with  roll  of drum, we come,  we
come;
To Isengard with doom we come!
With doom we come, with doom we come!
So they sang as they marched southwards.
Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into  the  line beside Treebeard. The
old Ent  now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders again, and
so they rode proudly at the head of  the sin ng  company with beating hearts
and heads held high. Though they ad expected something to happen eventually,
they were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as
sudden as the bursting of a flood that had long been held back by a dike.
'The Ents made up  their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they?'
Pippin  ventured to  say  after  some time, when  for a  moment  the singing
paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard.
'Quickly?' said Treebeard. 'Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected.
Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an age. We Ents do not
like being roused; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our
trees  and our  lives  are in  great  danger. That has not happened  in this
Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea.  It is the orc-work,
the wanton hewing  --        rbrum    --  without even the  bad excuse of  feeding the
fires, that has so angered us; and the  treachery of a neighbour, who should
have helped us. Wizards ought to know better: they do know  better. There is
no curse in  Elvish, Entish, or  the  tongues  of Men bad  enough  for  such
treachery. Down with Saruman!'
'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?' asked Merry.
'Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps. how strong
we are. Maybe you have heard  of Trolls? They  are mighty strong. But Trolls
are only counterfeits. made by the  Enemy in the Great  Darkness, in mockery
of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls.  We are made of
the  bones  of  the earth. We can split stone like  the roots of trees, only
quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused!  If we  are not hewn down, or
destroyed  by  fire  or blast  of  sorcery,  we could  split  Isengard  into
splinters and crack its walls into rubble.'
'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?'
'Hm,  ah, yes, that is so. I  have  not  forgotten  it.  Indeed  I have
thought long about it. But. you see, many of the Ents are younger than I am.
by many lives of trees. They  are all  roused now. and  their mind is all on
one  thing: breaking Isengard.  But they will  start  thinking  again before
long; they  will  cool down a little. when we take our evening drink. What a
thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to
go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.'
Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a  while. But after a
time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that
his old  brow was wrinkled and  knotted.  At  last he  looked up, and Pippin
could see a sad look in his eyes,  sad but not unhappy. There was a light in
them, as if  the green  flame had  sunk deeper into the  dark  wells of  his
thought.
'Of course, it  is likely  enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely
enough that we are going to  our doom: the last march of the Ents. But if we
stayed at home  and did nothing, doom would find us anyway, sooner or later.
That thought has long been  growing in our hearts;  and that is  why we  are
marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the
Ents may  be worth a song.  Aye,'  he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples
before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the  songs come  true
about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to  see Fimbrethil again. But
there, my friends, songs  like trees bear fruit  only  in their own time and
their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.'
The Ents  went  striding  on at a great pace. They had descended into a
long fold of the land that fell away southward;  now they began to climb up,
and up, on to the high western  ridge. The woods fell  away and they came to
scattered groups of birch, and  then  to bare slopes where only  a few gaunt
pine-trees grew. The sun  sank behind the dark hill-back in front. Grey dusk
fell.
