Chapter 3. Three is Company
'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to  go soon,' said Gandalf. Two
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made  no sign of getting ready to
go.
'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanish
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.'
'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all!
I said  soon,   not  instantly.  If  you can think of any way of slipping out  of
the  Shire  without  its  being generally known, it will  be  worth a little
delay. But you must not delay too long.'
'What  about the  autumn, on  or after  Our Birthday?' asked  Frodo. 'I
think I could probably make some arrangements by then.'
To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come
to  the  point. Bag End seemed a more  desirable residence than  it  had for
years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the
Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think
more kindly  of journeying, as it always did at that season. He  had  indeed
privately made up his mind to leave on his  fiftieth birthday:  Bilbo's  one
hundred and twenty-eighth. It  seemed somehow the proper day on which to set
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and  the  one
thing  that made the thought  of leaving  bearable. He  thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in  the end. But he did
not tell all his  thoughts to Gandalf. What the  wizard  guessed  was always
difficult to tell.
He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that will
do -  but  it must not  be any  later. I  am getting  very anxious.  In  the
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going!
And  see  that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him
into a toad.'
'As for   where I   am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be  difficult to give
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.'
'Don't be absurd!' said Gandalf. 'I  am not warning you against leaving
an  address  at the post-office!  But you are leaving the  Shire  - and that
should not be known,  until you  are far away. And  you must go, or at least
set  out,  either North,  South,  West  or East -  and  the direction should
certainly not be known.'
'I have been so  taken up with the thoughts of leaving  Bag End, and of
saying  farewell, that I have  never even  considered  the  direction,' said
Frodo. 'For where am I to go? And by  what  shall I  steer? What is to be my
quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose
one, and not return, as far as I can see.'
'But you cannot  see very far,' said Gandalf. 'Neither can I. It may be
your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do
not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet.'
'No  indeed!' said  Frodo.  'But  in the  meantime what course am I  to
lake?'
'Towards  danger; but not  too  rashly, nor too straight,' answered the
wizard. 'If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey  should not
prove too  perilous, though the  Road is less easy than it was, and it  will
grow worse as the year fails.'
'Rivendell!' said  Frodo. 'Very good:  I will go east, and  I will make
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.' He
spoke lightly;  but his heart was  moved  suddenly with  a desire to see the
house of Elrond  Halfelven, and  breathe the  air  of that deep valley where
many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace.
One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news  reached the                     Ivy Bush
and  Green Dragon.        Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were
forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was  selling Bag End, indeed
he had already sold it - to the Sackville-Bagginses!
'For a nice bit, loo,' said some.  'At a bargain price,'  said  others,
'and that's more likely when Mistress Lobelia's  the  buyer.' (Otho had died
some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.)
Just  why  Mr.  Frodo  was selling  his  beautiful hole was  even  more
debatable than the price. A  few held the theory - supported by the nods and
hints  of Mr. Baggins himself - that Frodo's money was  running out: he  was
going to leave Hobbiton and live in a  quiet way on the proceeds of the sale
down  in  Buckland  among   his  Brandybuck  relations.  'As  far  from  the
Sackville-Bagginses  as may be,'  some added.  But  so firmly fixed  had the
notion of  the immeasurable wealth  of the Bagginses of Bag End  become that
most found this  hard to believe, harder than  any  other reason or unreason
that  their fancy  could suggest:  to  most  it suggested  a  dark  and  yet
unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the  Bag End'. But
however a removal might  fit in with the  designs of his wizardry, there was
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.
'Yes, I shall be moving  this autumn,' he  said.  'Merry Brandybuck  is
looking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.'
As a matter of fact with  Merry's help he had already chosen and bought
a little house  at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all  but
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on  the
eastern borders  of  the Shire, and as he had lived there  in childhood  his
going back would at least seem credible.
Gandalf  stayed in the Shire for over two months.  Then one evening, at
the end of  June, soon  after Frodo's  plan  had  been finally  arranged, he
suddenly  announced that  he was going off  again next morning.  'Only for a
short  while, I hope,'  he said.  'But  I am  going down beyond the southern
borders to get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.'
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried.
'Has anything happened?' he asked.
'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs
looking into. If I think it necessary after all  for you to get off at once,
I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick
to your plan; but be more careful than ever, especially of the  Ring. Let me
impress on you once more:           don't use it!'
He  went off at dawn.  'I may be back any day,'  he  said. 'At the very
latest I shall come back  for  the farewell party. I think after all you may
need my company on the Road.'
At first  Frodo  was a  good deal  disturbed,  and wondered often  what
Gandalf could  have  heard; but his  uneasiness wore  off, and in  the  fine
weather  he forgot his  troubles for a  while. The  Shire had seldom seen so
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey
was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full.
Autumn was well under  way  before  Frodo began to worry  about Gandalf
again.  September  was  passing  and there  was  still no  news of him.  The
Birthday, and the removal, drew  nearer, and still he did not come,  or send
word.  Bag End began to be busy.  Some of Frodo's friends  came  to stay and
help  him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco  Boffin, and
