we are. Maybe you have heard  of Trolls? They  are mighty strong. But Trolls
are only counterfeits. made by the  Enemy in the Great  Darkness, in mockery
of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls.  We are made of
the  bones  of  the earth. We can split stone like  the roots of trees, only
quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused!  If we  are not hewn down, or
destroyed  by  fire  or blast  of  sorcery,  we could  split  Isengard  into
splinters and crack its walls into rubble.'
'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?'
'Hm,  ah, yes, that is so. I  have  not  forgotten  it.  Indeed  I have
thought long about it. But. you see, many of the Ents are younger than I am.
by many lives of trees. They  are all  roused now. and  their mind is all on
one  thing: breaking Isengard.  But they will  start  thinking  again before
long; they  will  cool down a little. when we take our evening drink. What a
thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to
go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.'
Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a  while. But after a
time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that
his old  brow was wrinkled and  knotted.  At  last he  looked up, and Pippin
could see a sad look in his eyes,  sad but not unhappy. There was a light in
them, as if  the green  flame had  sunk deeper into the  dark  wells of  his
thought.
'Of course, it  is likely  enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely
enough that we are going to  our doom: the last march of the Ents. But if we
stayed at home  and did nothing, doom would find us anyway, sooner or later.
That thought has long been  growing in our hearts;  and that is  why we  are
marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the
Ents may  be worth a song.  Aye,'  he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples
before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the  songs come  true
about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to  see Fimbrethil again. But
there, my friends, songs  like trees bear fruit  only  in their own time and
their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.'
The Ents  went  striding  on at a great pace. They had descended into a
long fold of the land that fell away southward;  now they began to climb up,
and up, on to the high western  ridge. The woods fell  away and they came to
scattered groups of birch, and  then  to bare slopes where only  a few gaunt
pine-trees grew. The sun  sank behind the dark hill-back in front. Grey dusk
fell.
Pippin looked behind. The number of  the Ents had grown -- or  what was
happening? Where  the dim bare  slopes that  they had crossed should lie, he
thought he saw groves of trees. But they were  moving! Could it be  that the
trees of  Fangorn  were awake, and the  forest was rising, marching over the
hills to war? He rubbed his  eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived
him; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward. There was a noise like
wind  in many branches. The Ents were  drawing  near the  crest of the ridge
now, and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing was
to be  heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the  feet of the Ents,
and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of  many  drifting  leaves. At  last
they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a dark pit: the great cleft
at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunnr, the Valley of Saruman.
'Night lies over Isengard,' said Treebeard.
Chapter 5. The White Rider
'My very bones are chilled,' said Gimli, flapping his arms and stamping
his  feet.  Day  had  come at last.  At dawn  the companions  had made  such
breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they were getting ready to
search the ground again for signs of the hobbits.
'And do not forget that old man!' said Gimli. 'I should be happier if I
could see the print of a boot.'
'Why would that make you happy?' said Legolas.
'Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than he
seemed,' answered the Dwarf.
'Maybe,' said the Elf; 'but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the
grass is deep and springy.'
'That would not  baffle a Ranger,' said Gimli.  'A bent blade is enough
for Aragorn to read.  But I do not expect  him to find any traces. It was an
evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night.  I am sure of it, even under
the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even  now,
maybe.'
'It is likely enough,' said  Aragorn; 'yet I am not sure. I am thinking
of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away. But I
did not think so. Did  you hear  them, Legolas? Did they  sound to you  like
beasts in terror?'
'No,' said Legolas. 'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our
own  fear I should have guessed that they  were beasts wild with some sudden
gladness.  They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend  that they have
long missed.'
'So I thought,'  said  Aragorn; 'but I  cannot  read the riddle, unless
they return. Come! The  light  is growing fast. Let  us look first and guess
later! We should  begin here,  near  to  our own  camping-ground,  searching
carefully all about, and working  up  the slope  towards the forest. To find
the  hobbits is  our  errand, whatever we may think of  our  visitor in  the
night. If  they  escaped by some chance,  then they  must have hidden in the
trees, or they would have been seen. If we find nothing between here and the
eaves of the wood, then we will make a last search upon the battle-field and
among the ashes. But there  is little hope there:  the horsemen of Rohan did
