Chapter 5. The White Rider
'My very bones are chilled,' said Gimli, flapping his arms and stamping
his  feet.  Day  had  come at last.  At dawn  the companions  had made  such
breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they were getting ready to
search the ground again for signs of the hobbits.
'And do not forget that old man!' said Gimli. 'I should be happier if I
could see the print of a boot.'
'Why would that make you happy?' said Legolas.
'Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than he
seemed,' answered the Dwarf.
'Maybe,' said the Elf; 'but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the
grass is deep and springy.'
'That would not  baffle a Ranger,' said Gimli.  'A bent blade is enough
for Aragorn to read.  But I do not expect  him to find any traces. It was an
evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night.  I am sure of it, even under
the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even  now,
maybe.'
'It is likely enough,' said  Aragorn; 'yet I am not sure. I am thinking
of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away. But I
did not think so. Did  you hear  them, Legolas? Did they  sound to you  like
beasts in terror?'
'No,' said Legolas. 'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our
own  fear I should have guessed that they  were beasts wild with some sudden
gladness.  They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend  that they have
long missed.'
'So I thought,'  said  Aragorn; 'but I  cannot  read the riddle, unless
they return. Come! The  light  is growing fast. Let  us look first and guess
later! We should  begin here,  near  to  our own  camping-ground,  searching
carefully all about, and working  up  the slope  towards the forest. To find
the  hobbits is  our  errand, whatever we may think of  our  visitor in  the
night. If  they  escaped by some chance,  then they  must have hidden in the
trees, or they would have been seen. If we find nothing between here and the
eaves of the wood, then we will make a last search upon the battle-field and
among the ashes. But there  is little hope there:  the horsemen of Rohan did
their work too well.'
For some  time the companions crawled and groped upon  the  ground. The
tree stood  mournfully above  them, its  dry  leaves now hanging  limp,  and
rattling in the chill  easterly wind. Aragorn moved  slowly away. He came to
the ashes of the watch-fire  near the river-bank, and then  began to retrace
the ground back towards the knoll where the battle had been fought. Suddenly
he stooped and bent low with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to
the others. They came running up.
'Here at  last we find  news!' said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken leaf
for them  to see,  a large  pale leaf of golden  hue, now fading and turning
brown. 'Here is a mallorn-leaf  of Lurien, and there are small crumbs on it,
and a few more crumbs in the grass.  And  see! there are  some pieces of cut
cord lying nearby!'
'And here is  the knife that cut them!' said Gimli. He stooped and drew
out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it, a short jagged
blade. The  haft from  which it  had  been snapped was beside it. 'It was an
orc-weapon,'  he said,  holding it gingerly, and looking with disgust at the
carved handle: it  had been shaped like  a hideous  head with squinting eyes
and leering mouth.
'Well, here is  the strangest riddle that we have yet found!' exclaimed
Legolas.  'A  bound  prisoner  escapes  both from  the  Orcs  and  from  the
surrounding horsemen.  He  then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his
bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why? For if his legs were tied, how did
he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither
were tied, why did he cut the cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he
then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show
that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that,  I  suppose,  he
turned his arms into  wings and flew away singing into the trees. It  should
be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!'
'There was sorcery here right enough,' said  Gimli. 'What was that  old
man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you
better it?'
'Maybe,  I could,' said Aragorn, smiling.  'There are  some other signs
near at hand  that  you have not considered. I agree that the prisoner was a
hobbit and must have had either legs  or hands free, before he came  here. I
guess that it was  hands, because the riddle then becomes easier,  and  also
because, as I read the marks, he was           carried    to this point by  an Orc. Blood
was spilled  there,  a few paces away, orc-blood. There  are  deep prints of
hoofs  all about this  spot, and signs that a heavy thing was  dragged away.
The Orc  was slain by horsemen, and later  his body  was hauled to the fire.
But the hobbit  was not seen: he was not "in the open", for it was night and
he still had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and  hungry, and it is not to
be wondered at  that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of his fallen
enemy, he rested and ate a little  before he crept away. But it is a comfort
to  know  that he had some         lembas    in  his  pocket, even though  he  ran away
he
without gear  or pack;  that, perhaps, is  like a hobbit. I say  , though I
hope and guess  that both  Merry and  Pippin were  here together. There  is,
however, nothing to show that for certain.'
'And how do you suppose that either of  our friends came to have a hand
free?' asked Gimli.
'I do  not know how it happened,' answered Aragorn. 'Nor  do I know why
an Orc was carrying them  away. Not to help  them to escape, we may be sure.
Nay, rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled
me  from  the beginning: why when  Boromir had fallen  were the Orcs content
with the capture  of Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out the rest of us,
nor attack our camp;  but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard.
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful comrade?
I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Orcs,
even if they knew so much themselves; they would not speak openly to them of
the  Ring: they  are not trusty servants. But  I  think  the  Orcs had  been
commanded  to capture          hobbits  , alive, at all costs.  An attempt was made  to
slip out with the precious prisoners  before the  battle. Treachery perhaps,
likely  enough with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have  been trying
to  escape with the  prize  alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale.
Others might  be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one at least
of our  friends escaped. It is our task to find him and help  him  before we
return to Rohan.  We  must not  be  daunted by Fangorn, since need drove him
into that dark place.'
'I  do  not  know  which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the
long road through Rohan on foot,' said Gimli.
'Then let us go to the forest,' said Aragorn.
It was  not  long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,  near
the bank  of the Entwash, he came upon  footprints:  hobbit-prints, but  too
light for  much to  be made of  them. Then again beneath the bole of a great
