was spilled  there,  a few paces away, orc-blood. There  are  deep prints of
hoofs  all about this  spot, and signs that a heavy thing was  dragged away.
The Orc  was slain by horsemen, and later  his body  was hauled to the fire.
But the hobbit  was not seen: he was not "in the open", for it was night and
he still had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and  hungry, and it is not to
be wondered at  that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of his fallen
enemy, he rested and ate a little  before he crept away. But it is a comfort
to  know  that he had some         lembas    in  his  pocket, even though  he  ran away
he
without gear  or pack;  that, perhaps, is  like a hobbit. I say  , though I
hope and guess  that both  Merry and  Pippin were  here together. There  is,
however, nothing to show that for certain.'
'And how do you suppose that either of  our friends came to have a hand
free?' asked Gimli.
'I do  not know how it happened,' answered Aragorn. 'Nor  do I know why
an Orc was carrying them  away. Not to help  them to escape, we may be sure.
Nay, rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled
me  from  the beginning: why when  Boromir had fallen  were the Orcs content
with the capture  of Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out the rest of us,
nor attack our camp;  but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard.
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful comrade?
I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Orcs,
even if they knew so much themselves; they would not speak openly to them of
the  Ring: they  are not trusty servants. But  I  think  the  Orcs had  been
commanded  to capture          hobbits  , alive, at all costs.  An attempt was made  to
slip out with the precious prisoners  before the  battle. Treachery perhaps,
likely  enough with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have  been trying
to  escape with the  prize  alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale.
Others might  be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one at least
of our  friends escaped. It is our task to find him and help  him  before we
return to Rohan.  We  must not  be  daunted by Fangorn, since need drove him
into that dark place.'
'I  do  not  know  which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the
long road through Rohan on foot,' said Gimli.
'Then let us go to the forest,' said Aragorn.
It was  not  long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,  near
the bank  of the Entwash, he came upon  footprints:  hobbit-prints, but  too
light for  much to  be made of  them. Then again beneath the bole of a great
tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered. The earth was
bare and dry, and did not reveal much.
'One hobbit at least stood  here for a while and looked  back; and then
he turned away into the forest,' said Aragorn.
'Then we must go  in, too,' said Gimli. 'But I do not like the look  of
this Fangorn: and  we  were  warned  against  it. I  wish the chase had  led
anywhere else!'
'I do  not think  the wood feels evil,  whatever  tales  may say,' said
Legolas. He stood under the  eaves of the forest, stooping forward, as if he
were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows. 'No, it is  not
evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of
dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near
us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.'
'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,'  said Gimli.  'I have done
it no harm. '
'That is just as well,' said Legolas. 'But nonetheless it has  suffered
harm. There  is something  happening inside, or  going to happen. Do you not
feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.'
'I feel  the air is stuffy,' said the Dwarf. 'This wood is lighter than
Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.'
'It is old, very old,' said the Elf. 'So old that almost  I  feel young
again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old and
full of memory. I  could have been happy  here,  if  I  had come in days  of
peace.'
'I dare say  you could,'  snorted Gimli. 'You are a  Wood-elf,  anyway,
though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where you go,
I will go. But keep your bow ready to  hand, and I will keep my axe loose in
my belt. Not  for  use on trees,' he  added hastily, looking  up at the tree
under which they  stood.  'I do not  wish to meet that  old  man at unawares
without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!'
With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas
and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for him to see. The
floor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift of leaves; but guessing
that the fugitives would stay near the water, he returned often to the banks
of the stream.  So it was that he came upon the place where Merry and Pippin
had  drunk  and  bathed  their  feet.  There plain for all  to see were  the
footprints of two hobbits, one somewhat smaller than the other.
'This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet  the marks are  two days old
And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water-side.'
'Then what shall we do now?' said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through
the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do  not find
them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and
show our friendship by starving together.'
'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,'  said Aragorn.
'Let us go on.'
They  came at  length  to the steep abrupt  end of Treebeard's Hill and
looked  up at the rock-wall with its rough  steps leading to the high shelf.
Gleams of sun were  striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now
looked less grey and drear.
'Let  us go up and look about us!' said Legolas. 'I will feel my breath
short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.'
The  companions climbed  up. Aragorn came last,  moving slowly: he  was
scanning the steps and ledges closely.
'I am almost sure that the  hobbits  have been up here,'  he said. 'But
there  are  other marks,  very strange marks,  which  I do not understand. I
wonder if  we can see anything from this ledge which  will help us to  guess
which way they went next?'
He  stood up and looked about,  but he saw nothing that was of any use.
The shelf  faced southward  and  eastward; but only on the east was the view
open. There he could see the heads  of the trees descending in ranks towards
the plain from which they had come.
'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas.  'We could have all
come here safe together, if  we had left  the  Great River  on the second or
third day and  struck  west.  Few  can foresee whither their road  will lead
them, till they come to its end.'
'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli.
'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!'
'Look at what?' said Gimli.
'There in the trees.'
'Where? I have not elf-eyes.'
'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!'  said Legolas  pointing. 'Down in  the
wood, back in the Way  that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him,
passing from tree to tree?'
'I  see, I see  now!' hissed Gimli. 'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you?
