'This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet  the marks are  two days old
And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water-side.'
'Then what shall we do now?' said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through
the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do  not find
them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and
show our friendship by starving together.'
'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,'  said Aragorn.
'Let us go on.'
They  came at  length  to the steep abrupt  end of Treebeard's Hill and
looked  up at the rock-wall with its rough  steps leading to the high shelf.
Gleams of sun were  striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now
looked less grey and drear.
'Let  us go up and look about us!' said Legolas. 'I will feel my breath
short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.'
The  companions climbed  up. Aragorn came last,  moving slowly: he  was
scanning the steps and ledges closely.
'I am almost sure that the  hobbits  have been up here,'  he said. 'But
there  are  other marks,  very strange marks,  which  I do not understand. I
wonder if  we can see anything from this ledge which  will help us to  guess
which way they went next?'
He  stood up and looked about,  but he saw nothing that was of any use.
The shelf  faced southward  and  eastward; but only on the east was the view
open. There he could see the heads  of the trees descending in ranks towards
the plain from which they had come.
'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas.  'We could have all
come here safe together, if  we had left  the  Great River  on the second or
third day and  struck  west.  Few  can foresee whither their road  will lead
them, till they come to its end.'
'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli.
'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!'
'Look at what?' said Gimli.
'There in the trees.'
'Where? I have not elf-eyes.'
'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!'  said Legolas  pointing. 'Down in  the
wood, back in the Way  that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him,
passing from tree to tree?'
'I  see, I see  now!' hissed Gimli. 'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you?
There is the old man.  All in dirty  grey  rags: that is why I could not see
him at first.'
Aragorn  looked and beheld a  bent figure moving slowly. It was not far
away. It looked like  an old beggar-man, walking wearily, leaning on a rough
staff. His head was bowed,  and he did not look towards them. In other lands
they would have greeted him with kind words; but now they stood silent, each
feeling a strange expectancy: something was  approaching that  held a hidden
power-or menace.
Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the figure drew
nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he burst out: 'Your
bow,  Legolas! Bend  it!  Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or
put a spell upon us! Shoot first!'
Legolas  took  his  bow and bent it, slowly  and  as if some other will
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not fit it to the
string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent.
'Why are  you waiting? What is the  matter with  you?' said Gimli in  a
hissing whisper.
'Legolas is right,' said Aragorn quietly. 'We may not  shoot an old man
so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and
wait!'
At that moment the old man quickened  his pace and came with surprising
speed to the  foot of the  rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked up, while they
stood motionless looking down. There was no sound.
They  could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore
a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his  features were over-shadowed, except for
the end  of his  nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed  to  Aragorn that he
caught the gleam  of  eyes keen and bright  from  within  the shadow  of the
hooded brows.
At last the old man  broke the silence.  'Well met indeed, my friends,'
he said  in  a soft  voice. 'I wish to  speak to you. Will  you come down or
shall I come up?' Without waiting for an answer he began to climb.
'Now!' said Gimli. 'Stop him, Legolas!'
'Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?'  said the old man.  'Put
away that bow, Master Elf!'
The bow  and arrow fell from Legolas' hands, and his arms hung loose at
his sides.
'And you, Master Dwarf, pray  take your hand from your axe-haft, till I
am up! You will not need such arguments.'
Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man
sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a  goat. All weariness seemed to have
left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a  gleam, too brief for
certainty, a quick glint  of  white, as if some garment shrouded by the grey
rags had been for an instant revealed The intake  of Gimli's breath could be
heard as a loud hiss in the silence.
'Well met, I say again!' said the old man, coming towards them. When he
was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with his head thrust
forward, peering at them from under  his hood. 'And what may you be doing in
these  parts? An Elf, a Man, and  a Dwarf. all  clad  in  elvish fashion. No
doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often
seen here.'
'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?'
'Not well,' said  the  old man: 'that would be the study of many lives.
But I come here now and again.'
'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say
to us?'  said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand  that will
not wait.'
'As  for what I wished to say, I  have said it: What  may you be doing,
and  what  tale can  you tell of yourselves? As for my name!'  He broke off,
laughing  long  and  softly. Aragorn  felt a shudder run  through him at the
sound, a  strange  cold  thrill; and yet  it was not  fear or terror that he
felt: rather it was  like  the  sudden bite of a keen air,  or the slap of a
cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper.
'My name!' said the  old  man again. 'Have you not guessed it  already?
You have heard  it before, I  think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come
now, what of your tale?'
The three companions stood silent and made no answer.
'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your  errand is fit to
tell,' said the  old man. 'Happily I know something of it.  You are tracking
the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don't stare, as
if you had  never heard the strange  name before. You have,  and so have  I.
Well, they climbed up  here  the day before yesterday; and  they met someone
that they did not expect. Does that comfort you? And  now  you would like to
know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news
about
