am up! You will not need such arguments.'
Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man
sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a  goat. All weariness seemed to have
left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a  gleam, too brief for
certainty, a quick glint  of  white, as if some garment shrouded by the grey
rags had been for an instant revealed The intake  of Gimli's breath could be
heard as a loud hiss in the silence.
'Well met, I say again!' said the old man, coming towards them. When he
was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with his head thrust
forward, peering at them from under  his hood. 'And what may you be doing in
these  parts? An Elf, a Man, and  a Dwarf. all  clad  in  elvish fashion. No
doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often
seen here.'
'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?'
'Not well,' said  the  old man: 'that would be the study of many lives.
But I come here now and again.'
'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say
to us?'  said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand  that will
not wait.'
'As  for what I wished to say, I  have said it: What  may you be doing,
and  what  tale can  you tell of yourselves? As for my name!'  He broke off,
laughing  long  and  softly. Aragorn  felt a shudder run  through him at the
sound, a  strange  cold  thrill; and yet  it was not  fear or terror that he
felt: rather it was  like  the  sudden bite of a keen air,  or the slap of a
cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper.
'My name!' said the  old  man again. 'Have you not guessed it  already?
You have heard  it before, I  think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come
now, what of your tale?'
The three companions stood silent and made no answer.
'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your  errand is fit to
tell,' said the  old man. 'Happily I know something of it.  You are tracking
the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don't stare, as
if you had  never heard the strange  name before. You have,  and so have  I.
Well, they climbed up  here  the day before yesterday; and  they met someone
that they did not expect. Does that comfort you? And  now  you would like to
know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news
about
that.  But why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.'
The old man turned away  and went  towards a heap of fallen stones  and
rock at the  foot of the cliff  behind. Immediately, as  if a spell had been
removed, the others relaxed and  stirred. Gimli's  hand  went at once to his
axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his bow.
The old man took no notice,  but stooped and sat himself on  a low flat
stone. Then  his grey cloak  drew apart, and they saw, beyond doubt, that he
was clothed beneath all in white.
'Saruman!' cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand. 'speak!
Tell  us where you have  hidden  our friends! What  have you done with them?
Speak, or  I will  make a dint in your hat that even  a wizard will find  it
hard to deal with!'
The old  man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to
the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tall, towering above
them. His hood and his grey rags were flung away. His  white garments shone.
He  lifted up  his staff, and  Gimli's axe leaped from his  grasp  and  fell
ringing on the ground. The sword of Aragorn,  stiff in his motionless  hand,
blazed with a sudden fire. Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high
into the air: it vanished in a flash of flame.
'Mithrandir!' he cried. 'Mithrandir!'
'Well met, I say to you again. Legolas!' said the old man.
They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in  the sunshine; and
gleaming  white  was his robe;  the eyes under  his deep  brows were bright,
piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between wonder, joy,
and fear they stood and found no words to say.
At  last  Aragorn stirred.  'Gandalf!'  he said.  'Beyond all hope  you
return to us in our  need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!' Gimli said
nothing, hut sank to his knees, shading his eyes.
'Gandalf,' the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory a long
disused word. 'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.'
He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak wrapped it
about him: it seemed as if  the  sun had been  shining, but now was  hid  in
cloud again.  'Yes, you may  still call me Gandalf,'  he said, and the voice
was the  voice  of their old friend  and guide. 'Get  up, my  good Gimli! No
blame to  you, and no harm done to  me. Indeed my friends,  none of you have
any weapon that could  hurt me. Be merry! We meet  again. At the turn of the
tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.'
He laid  his hand on  Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed
suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!'
'Yes, I am white  now,' said Gandalf.  'Indeed I            am    Saruman, one might
almost  say,  Saruman  as  he  should have  been. But come  now, tell me  of
yourselves! I  have passed through fire and  deep water,  since we parted. I
have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had
forgotten. I can see  many things far off, but many things that are close at
hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!'
'What do  you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since
we parted on  the bridge would be a long tale.  Will you  not first give  us
news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?'
'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the
valleys of the  Emyn Muil, and I did not know  of their captivity, until the
eagle told me.'
'The eagle!' said  Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the
last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.'
'Yes,'  said Gandalf,  'that  was Gwaihir the Windlord,  who rescued me
from Orthanc.  I sent him before me to watch the River and  gather  tidings.
His sight is keen, but he cannot see all  that passes under hill  and  tree.
Some things he has  seen, and  others I  have seen myself.  The Ring now has
passed beyond my help, or  the help of any of  the Company that set out from
Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to  the Enemy, but it escaped.  I had
some part in that: for I sat  in a  high place, and I strove  with the  Dark
Tower; and  the Shadow passed. Then  I  was weary, very weary; and I  walked
long in dark thought.'
'Then you know about Frodo!' said Gimli. 'How do things go with him?'
'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him
still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I
can say.'
'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.'
'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on
his face. 'Did  he indeed? It is news to  me, yet  it does not  surprise me.
Good! Very good! You lighten  my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by
me
and tell me the tale of your journey.'
The companions  sat on the ground at his  feet, and Aragorn took up the
