tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.'
He laid  his hand on  Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed
suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!'
'Yes, I am white  now,' said Gandalf.  'Indeed I            am    Saruman, one might
almost  say,  Saruman  as  he  should have  been. But come  now, tell me  of
yourselves! I  have passed through fire and  deep water,  since we parted. I
have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had
forgotten. I can see  many things far off, but many things that are close at
hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!'
'What do  you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since
we parted on  the bridge would be a long tale.  Will you  not first give  us
news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?'
'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the
valleys of the  Emyn Muil, and I did not know  of their captivity, until the
eagle told me.'
'The eagle!' said  Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the
last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.'
'Yes,'  said Gandalf,  'that  was Gwaihir the Windlord,  who rescued me
from Orthanc.  I sent him before me to watch the River and  gather  tidings.
His sight is keen, but he cannot see all  that passes under hill  and  tree.
Some things he has  seen, and  others I  have seen myself.  The Ring now has
passed beyond my help, or  the help of any of  the Company that set out from
Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to  the Enemy, but it escaped.  I had
some part in that: for I sat  in a  high place, and I strove  with the  Dark
Tower; and  the Shadow passed. Then  I  was weary, very weary; and I  walked
long in dark thought.'
'Then you know about Frodo!' said Gimli. 'How do things go with him?'
'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him
still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I
can say.'
'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.'
'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on
his face. 'Did  he indeed? It is news to  me, yet  it does not  surprise me.
Good! Very good! You lighten  my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by
me
and tell me the tale of your journey.'
The companions  sat on the ground at his  feet, and Aragorn took up the
tale. For a long  while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no questions. His
hands were  spread upon his knees, and his eyes  were closed. At  last  when
Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of his last journey upon the Great
River, the old man sighed.
'You have not said  all  that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,' he
said quietly. 'Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to him. It was  a
sore trial  for such a man: a warrior, and a  lord of men. Galadriel told me
that he was in peril. But  he escaped in the end.  I am glad. It was  not in
vain that  the  young hobbits  came with us, if only for Boromir's sake. But
that is not the  only part they have to play. They were brought  to Fangorn,
and  their coming  was like  the  falling  of  small stones  that starts  an
avalanche  in  the  mountains. Even  as  we talk  here,  I  hear  the  first
rumblings. Saruman  had  best  not be caught  away  from  home  when the dam
bursts!'
'In one thing you  have not changed, dear friend,' said  Aragorn:  'you
still speak in riddles.'
'What?  In riddles?'  said  Gandalf. 'No!  For I was talking  aloud  to
myself. A habit of the old: they choose  the wisest  person present to speak
to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.' He laughed, but
the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam of sunshine.
'I am  no longer  young even  in the  reckoning of  Men of the  Ancient
Houses,' said Aragorn. 'Will you not open your mind more clearly to me?'
'What  then shall  I say?'  said Gandalf, and  paused  for a  while  in
thought. 'This in brief is how  I  see things at the moment, if you wish  to
have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of course, has long
known that the Ring  is abroad, and that it is  borne by a  hobbit. He knows
now the number  of our  Company that set out from Rivendell, and the kind of
each of us.  But he does  not yet  perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes
that we were all going  to Minas Tirith; for that is what he  would  himself
have done in our  place. And according to  his wisdom  it would have  been a
heavy stroke against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what
mighty  one  may suddenly  appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with
war, seeking to cast him  down and take his  place. That we  should wish  to
cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought that  occurs  to
his  mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself has not yet entered
into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you will see our good fortune  and
our hope. For imagining war he has let loose war,  believing  that he has no
time to  waste; for he  that  strikes the  first blow, if he strikes it hard
enough, may need  to strike no  more.  So the forces that he has  long  been
preparing he is now  setting in motion, sooner than he intended.  Wise fool.
For if he had used all his power to guard Mordor,  so that none could enter,
and bent  all his guild  to the hunting of the  Ring, then indeed hope would
have faded: neither  Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his
eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas
Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon it like a storm.
'For  already he knows that the messengers that  he  sent to waylay the
Company have  failed again. They have not  found the Ring. Neither have they
brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they done even so much as that, it
would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us
not darken  our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the
Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:'
'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli.
'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf.  'Doubly. And is  not that strange? Nothing
that  we have endured of  late has seemed  so grievous  as  the  treason  of
Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong.
He threatens the Men of  Rohan and draws  off their help from Minas  Tirith,
even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon
is ever a danger to the hand.  Saruman also had a mind to capture  the Ring,
for  himself,  or  at least to snare  some hobbits for his evil purposes. So
between them our enemies have contrived only to  bring Merry and Pippin with
marvellous speed, and in the  nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they
would never have come at all!
'Also they have  filled  themselves with new doubts that  disturb their
plans. No tidings of  the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen
of Rohan;  but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were  taken in the  Emyn
Muil  and borne away  towards Isengard against the will of his own servants.
He now has Isengard to fear as  well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls,
it will go ill with Saruman.'
'It is a pity that our friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land
divided Isengard  and Mordor, then  they could  fight  while we watched  and
waited.'
'The victor would emerge  stronger  than either, and  free from doubt,'
said  Gandalf.  'But  Isengard  cannot  fight  Mordor,  unless Saruman first
obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril.
