time to  waste; for he  that  strikes the  first blow, if he strikes it hard
enough, may need  to strike no  more.  So the forces that he has  long  been
preparing he is now  setting in motion, sooner than he intended.  Wise fool.
For if he had used all his power to guard Mordor,  so that none could enter,
and bent  all his guild  to the hunting of the  Ring, then indeed hope would
have faded: neither  Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his
eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas
Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon it like a storm.
'For  already he knows that the messengers that  he  sent to waylay the
Company have  failed again. They have not  found the Ring. Neither have they
brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they done even so much as that, it
would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us
not darken  our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the
Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:'
'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli.
'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf.  'Doubly. And is  not that strange? Nothing
that  we have endured of  late has seemed  so grievous  as  the  treason  of
Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong.
He threatens the Men of  Rohan and draws  off their help from Minas  Tirith,
even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon
is ever a danger to the hand.  Saruman also had a mind to capture  the Ring,
for  himself,  or  at least to snare  some hobbits for his evil purposes. So
between them our enemies have contrived only to  bring Merry and Pippin with
marvellous speed, and in the  nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they
would never have come at all!
'Also they have  filled  themselves with new doubts that  disturb their
plans. No tidings of  the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen
of Rohan;  but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were  taken in the  Emyn
Muil  and borne away  towards Isengard against the will of his own servants.
He now has Isengard to fear as  well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls,
it will go ill with Saruman.'
'It is a pity that our friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land
divided Isengard  and Mordor, then  they could  fight  while we watched  and
waited.'
'The victor would emerge  stronger  than either, and  free from doubt,'
said  Gandalf.  'But  Isengard  cannot  fight  Mordor,  unless Saruman first
obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril.
There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his
prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on
his messengers. But he came too late, for once,  and the battle was over and
beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not  remain here long.
I  look into  his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes
that the horsemen slew and burned all  upon the field of battle; but he does
not know whether  the Orcs were bringing any  prisoners or not. And  he does
not know of  the  quarrel between his  servants and the Orcs  of Mordor; nor
does he know of the Winged Messenger.'
'The Winged  Messenger!' cried  Legolas. 'I shot at him with the bow of
Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled  him from the sky. He filled us all
with fear. What new terror is this?'
'One that you cannot slay with arrows,'  said  Gandalf. 'You only  slew
his steed.  It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again.  For he
was a Nazgyl, one of  the Nine, who ride now upon winged  steeds. Soon their
terror will overshadow the last armies of  our friends, cutting off the sun.
But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and  Saruman does not
know of this new shape  in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought
is ever on  the Ring.  Was  it  present in the battle? Was it found? What if
Thjoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is
the danger that he  sees,  and  he  has fled  back to Isengard to double and
treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close
at  hand,  which  he does  not  see, busy  with his fiery  thoughts. He  has
forgotten Treebeard.'
'Now  you  speak  to  yourself  again,'  said  Aragorn  with  a  smile.
'Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of  Saruman's  double
treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn
has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.'
'Wait a minute!'  cried Gimli. 'There  is another  thing that  I should
like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?'
'You  certainly did  not see me,'  answered Gandalf,  'therefore I must
guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire
to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.'
'Good, good!' said Gimli. 'I am glad that it was not you.'
Gandalf laughed again. 'Yes, my good Dwarf,' he said, 'it is a  comfort
not to  be mistaken at all  points. Do I not know  it only too well! But, of
course, I  never blamed you for your welcome of me. How  could I  do so, who
have so  often  counselled  my friends to suspect even their  own hands when
dealing  with  the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Gluin! Maybe you will see
us both together one day and judge between us!'
'But  the hobbits!' Legolas broke in. 'We have  come far to seek  them,
and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?'
'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf.
'The Ents!' exclaimed  Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends
about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees?
Are  there  still  Ents in the  world? I thought they were  only a memory of
ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.'
'A legend  of Rohan!' cried  Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has
sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us  they
are only a memory. If I were to meet one  still walking in this  world, then
indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of
Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem  to  speak of a  person. Who is
this Treebeard?'
'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of
his long  slow  story would  make  a  tale for which we  have no  time  now.
Treebeard  is Fangorn, the  guardian of the  forest; he is the oldest of the
Ents, the oldest living thing that still  walks  beneath the Sun  upon  this
Middle-earth. I  hope indeed,  Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and
Pippin have been fortunate: they  met  him here, even where  we sit. For  he
came here  two days ago  and bore  them away to his  dwelling far off by the
roots of the  mountains. He often  comes here, especially  when  his mind is
uneasy, and rumours of  the world outside trouble him. I  saw him  four days
ago striding among the trees, and  I  think he saw me, for he  paused; but I
did not  speak,  for I was heavy with  thought, and  weary after my struggle
with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.'
'Perhaps  he also thought that you were  Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you
speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.'
'Dangerous!'  cried  Gandalf.  'And  so  am  I,  very  dangerous:  more
dangerous than anything you  will  ever meet,  unless you are  brought alive
before  the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas  is
dangerous. You  are  beset with  dangers,  Gimli  son  of Gluin; for you are
dangerous yourself,  in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is
perilous-not  least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn
himself, he  is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now
