have so  often  counselled  my friends to suspect even their  own hands when
dealing  with  the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Gluin! Maybe you will see
us both together one day and judge between us!'
'But  the hobbits!' Legolas broke in. 'We have  come far to seek  them,
and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?'
'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf.
'The Ents!' exclaimed  Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends
about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees?
Are  there  still  Ents in the  world? I thought they were  only a memory of
ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.'
'A legend  of Rohan!' cried  Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has
sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us  they
are only a memory. If I were to meet one  still walking in this  world, then
indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of
Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem  to  speak of a  person. Who is
this Treebeard?'
'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of
his long  slow  story would  make  a  tale for which we  have no  time  now.
Treebeard  is Fangorn, the  guardian of the  forest; he is the oldest of the
Ents, the oldest living thing that still  walks  beneath the Sun  upon  this
Middle-earth. I  hope indeed,  Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and
Pippin have been fortunate: they  met  him here, even where  we sit. For  he
came here  two days ago  and bore  them away to his  dwelling far off by the
roots of the  mountains. He often  comes here, especially  when  his mind is
uneasy, and rumours of  the world outside trouble him. I  saw him  four days
ago striding among the trees, and  I  think he saw me, for he  paused; but I
did not  speak,  for I was heavy with  thought, and  weary after my struggle
with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.'
'Perhaps  he also thought that you were  Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you
speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.'
'Dangerous!'  cried  Gandalf.  'And  so  am  I,  very  dangerous:  more
dangerous than anything you  will  ever meet,  unless you are  brought alive
before  the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas  is
dangerous. You  are  beset with  dangers,  Gimli  son  of Gluin; for you are
dangerous yourself,  in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is
perilous-not  least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn
himself, he  is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now
his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled  with it.
The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it:
it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman
and the axes of Isengard.  A thing is about to happen which has not happened
since the Elder  Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they  are
strong.'
'What will they do?' asked Legolas in astonishment.
'I do not know,' said Gandalf. 'I do not think  they know themselves. I
wonder.' He fell silent, his head bowed in thought.
The  others looked  at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell
on his hands, which lay now  upturned on his  lap: they seemed to  be filled
with light as  a  cup is with water. At last he looked up and gazed straight
at the sun.
'The morning is wearing away,' he said. 'Soon we must go.'
'Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard?' asked Aragorn.
'No,' said Gandalf. 'That is not  the road that  you must take. I  have
spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is
upon us and all  our friends, a war in which only the use  of  the Ring
could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great
fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf,
Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.'
He rose and gazed out  eastward, shading his eyes, as if he  saw things
far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he  said
in  a soft voice, 'it has gone beyond our reach. Of that at least let  us be
glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring. We must go down to face a
peril near despair, yet that deadly peril is removed.'
He turned. 'Come, Aragorn son of  Arathorn!'  he said. 'Do  not  regret
your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil,  nor call it a vain pursuit. You
chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the  choice  was just,  and it
has  been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met
too late. But the quest  of  your companions is over. Your  next  journey is
marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Thjoden in
his
hall. For you are needed. The  light of And®ril must now be uncovered in the
battle for  which it has so long waited. There is  war in  Rohan,  and worse
evil: it goes ill with Thjoden.'
'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?' said Legolas.
'I  did not say so,' said Gandalf. 'Who knows?  Have patience. Go where
you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.'
'It is a long  way for  a man to walk, young or old,'  said Aragorn. 'I
fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.'
'We shall  see,  we  shall see,' said  Gandalf. 'Will you come now with
me?'
'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that
you  will  come  there before me, if you wish.' He rose and  looked  long at
Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood there facing  one
another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn,  was tall, and
stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he  looked  as  if some
king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the  shores of lesser men.
Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some  light
kindled within,  bent, laden  with  years,  but holding a  power beyond  the
strength of kings.
'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go
whithersoever you wished quicker  than  I?  And this I also say: you are our
captain and our banner.  The Dark Lord  has Nine. But we have One,  mightier
than  they: the White Rider. He  has passed through the fire and  the abyss,
and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.'
'Yes, together we will  follow you,' said Legolas. 'But first, it would
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you  in Moria. Will you not tell
us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?'
'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But
if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.'
'Then  tell  us what  you will, and  time allows!'  said  Gimli. 'Come,
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!'
'Name him  not!' said Gandalf,  and for a moment it seemed that a cloud
of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long
time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with  difficulty.
'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then
we plunged into the deep water and all was  dark. Cold it was as the tide of
death: almost it froze my heart.'
'Deep  is the abyss  that is spanned by Durin's  Bridge, and  none  has
measured it,' said Gimli.
'Yet  it has  a  bottom, beyond  light  and  knowledge,'  said Gandalf.
'Thither I came at last, to the  uttermost foundations of stone. He was with
