'I  did not say so,' said Gandalf. 'Who knows?  Have patience. Go where
you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.'
'It is a long  way for  a man to walk, young or old,'  said Aragorn. 'I
fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.'
'We shall  see,  we  shall see,' said  Gandalf. 'Will you come now with
me?'
'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that
you  will  come  there before me, if you wish.' He rose and  looked  long at
Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood there facing  one
another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn,  was tall, and
stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he  looked  as  if some
king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the  shores of lesser men.
Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some  light
kindled within,  bent, laden  with  years,  but holding a  power beyond  the
strength of kings.
'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go
whithersoever you wished quicker  than  I?  And this I also say: you are our
captain and our banner.  The Dark Lord  has Nine. But we have One,  mightier
than  they: the White Rider. He  has passed through the fire and  the abyss,
and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.'
'Yes, together we will  follow you,' said Legolas. 'But first, it would
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you  in Moria. Will you not tell
us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?'
'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But
if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.'
'Then  tell  us what  you will, and  time allows!'  said  Gimli. 'Come,
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!'
'Name him  not!' said Gandalf,  and for a moment it seemed that a cloud
of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long
time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with  difficulty.
'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then
we plunged into the deep water and all was  dark. Cold it was as the tide of
death: almost it froze my heart.'
'Deep  is the abyss  that is spanned by Durin's  Bridge, and  none  has
measured it,' said Gimli.
'Yet  it has  a  bottom, beyond  light  and  knowledge,'  said Gandalf.
'Thither I came at last, to the  uttermost foundations of stone. He was with
me still.  His fire was  quenched, but now he was a thing of slime, stronger
than a strangling snake.
'We fought far under the living earth, where time is  not counted. Ever
he clutched  me,  and  ever I  hewed  him,  till at last he  fled into  dark
tunnels. They were not made by Durin's  folk, Gimli  son of  Gluin. Far, far
below the  deepest delving  of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed  by nameless
things.  Even Sauron  knows them not. They  are  older  than  he. Now I have
walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that
despair my enemy was my only hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel.
Thus he brought me back at last to the secret  ways of Khazad-dym: too  well
he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.'
'Long has that  been lost,' said  Gimli. 'Many have  said  that it  was
never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.'
'It  was made, and it had not been destroyed,'  said Gandalf. 'From the
lowest dungeon to the highest peak  it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral
in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in  Durin's Tower  carved in
the living rock of Zirak-zigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine.
'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay
a  narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world.  The  sun shone
fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud.  Out he sprang, and even
as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps
in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.' Suddenly
Gandalf laughed. 'But what would they say in song? Those that looked up from
afar thought that  the  mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard,
and lightning, they said, smote upon  Celebdil,  and leaped back broken into
tongues of fire. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about us, vapour and
steam. Ice fell like  rain. I threw down my enemy, and he fell from the high
place  and broke the  mountain-side  where  he  smote it  in his ruin.  Then
darkness took me; and I strayed out  of thought and time, and I wandered far
on roads that I will not tell.
'Naked I was sent back -- for a brief time, until my task  is done. And
naked I lay upon  the mountain-top. The tower behind was crumbled into dust,
the window gone; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone. I
was alone, forgotten, without escape upon the hard horn  of the world. There
I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long
as a life-age of the earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all
lands: the springing and the dying,  the song  and the weeping, and the slow
everlasting  groan  of  overburdened stone. And  so  at the last Gwaihir the
Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away.
' 'Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said.
' 'A burden  you have been,'  he answered, 'but not so  now. Light as a
swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines  through you. Indeed  I do
not think you need me any more: were  I to let you fall you would float upon
the wind.'
' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me
to Lothlurien!'
' 'That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look
for you,' he answered.
'Thus  it was  that  I  came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately
gone. I tarried  there  in  the  ageless time of that  land where days bring
healing  not  decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed  in white. Counsel I
gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I  bring
to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this:
Where now are the D®nedain, Elessar, Elessar?
Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?
Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,
And the Grey Company ride from the North.
But dark is the path appointed for thee:
The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.
To Legolas she sent this word:
Legolas Greenleaf long under tree
In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!
If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,
Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.'
Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.
'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head.
'Dark are her words,'  said Legolas, 'and little  do they mean to those
that receive them.'
'That is no comfort,' said Gimli.
'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would  you  have her speak openly to you of
your death?'
'Yes. if she had nought else to say.'
'What  is that?' said Gandalf, opening his  eyes. 'Yes,  I think I  can
guess  what her  words  may  mean.  Your pardon,  Gimli! I was pondering the
