everlasting  groan  of  overburdened stone. And  so  at the last Gwaihir the
Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away.
' 'Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said.
' 'A burden  you have been,'  he answered, 'but not so  now. Light as a
swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines  through you. Indeed  I do
not think you need me any more: were  I to let you fall you would float upon
the wind.'
' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me
to Lothlurien!'
' 'That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look
for you,' he answered.
'Thus  it was  that  I  came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately
gone. I tarried  there  in  the  ageless time of that  land where days bring
healing  not  decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed  in white. Counsel I
gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I  bring
to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this:
Where now are the D®nedain, Elessar, Elessar?
Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?
Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,
And the Grey Company ride from the North.
But dark is the path appointed for thee:
The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.
To Legolas she sent this word:
Legolas Greenleaf long under tree
In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!
If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,
Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.'
Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.
'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head.
'Dark are her words,'  said Legolas, 'and little  do they mean to those
that receive them.'
'That is no comfort,' said Gimli.
'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would  you  have her speak openly to you of
your death?'
'Yes. if she had nought else to say.'
'What  is that?' said Gandalf, opening his  eyes. 'Yes,  I think I  can
guess  what her  words  may  mean.  Your pardon,  Gimli! I was pondering the
messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you, and  neither dark nor
sad.
'  "To  Gimli son  of  Gluin," she  said,  "give  his  Lady's greeting.
Lock-bearer, wherever thou goest  my thought goes with thee. But have a care
to lay thine axe to the right tree!" '
'In  happy hour  you  have returned to  us, Gandalf,'  cried the Dwarf,
capering  as  he sang  loudly in the  strange dwarf-tongue. 'Come, come!' he
shouted, swinging his axe. 'Since Gandalf's head is now sacred, let us  find
one that it is right to cleave!'
'That  will  not  be far to seek,' said  Gandalf, rising from his seat.
'Come!  We have  spent all  the time that is allowed to a meeting  of parted
friends. Now there is need of haste.'
He wrapped himself again  in his old  tattered cloak, and led the  way.
Following  him they descended quickly from the high shelf and made their way
back through the forest, down the bank  of the Entwash. They  spoke no  more
words,  until they stood again upon the grass  beyond the eaves of  Fangorn.
There was no sign of their horses to be seen.
'They have not returned,' said Legolas. 'It will be a weary walk!'
'I shall not  walk. Time presses,' said  Gandalf.  Then lifting up  his
head he gave  a long whistle. So clear and  piercing was  the  note that the
others  stood  amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips.
Three times he whistled; and then  faint and far off it seemed to  them that
they heard the whinny  of a horse borne up from the plains upon the  eastern
wind.  They waited wondering. Before long there came  the sound of hoofs, at
first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as
he lay upon the  grass, then  growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick
beat.
'There is more than one horse coming,' said Aragorn.
'Certainly,' said Gandalf. 'We are too great a burden for one.'
'There are three,'  said Legolas, gazing out  over the plain.  'See how
they run!  There is Hasufel, and  there is my  friend Arod  beside  him! But
there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his
like before.'
'Nor will you again,' said Gandalf. 'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief
of the   Mearas    , lords  of horses, and not even Thjoden, King  of  Rohan, has
ever looked on  a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly
as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White  Rider. We are
going to battle together.'
Even  as the old wizard  spoke,  the great horse  came striding up  the
slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowing in the wind
of his speed. The two others followed, now  far behind. As soon as Shadowfax
saw Gandalf, he checked his  pace and  whinnied loudly; then trotting gently
forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the
old man's neck.
Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a  long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he
said;  'but you are wise and swift and  come at need.  Far let us  ride  now
together, and part not in this world again!'
Soon  the other horses  came up  and stood quietly  by, as if  awaiting
orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the  hall of your master, Thjoden,' said
Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads.  'Time presses, so
with your leave, my friends, we  will ride. We beg you to use  all the speed
that  you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli
before me, and by  his leave  Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now
only to drink a little.'
'Now I understand a part of last night's  riddle,' said Legolas  as  he
sprang lightly  upon Arod's back.  'Whether they  fled  at first in fear, or
not,  our horses met  Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with  joy.
Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?'
'Yes, I knew,'  said the wizard.  'I bent  my thought upon him, bidding
him to  make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of this land.
Swiftly may he bear me back again!'
Gandalf spoke  now to Shadowfax, and  the horse set off at a good pace,
yet  not  beyond the measure of the  others. After a little while  he turned
suddenly, and  choosing  a place where the banks  were  lower, he waded  the
river, and then led them away due south into a flat land, treeless and wide.
The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of  grass. There was
no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter.
'He is  steering a straight course now for  the halls of Thjoden  under
the slopes of the White  Mountains,' said  Gandalf. 'It will be  quicker so.
The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies,
across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.'
For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the
grass was so high  that it  reached above the knees of the riders, and their
