unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the  Bag End'. But
however a removal might  fit in with the  designs of his wizardry, there was
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.
'Yes, I shall be moving  this autumn,' he  said.  'Merry Brandybuck  is
looking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.'
As a matter of fact with  Merry's help he had already chosen and bought
a little house  at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all  but
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on  the
eastern borders  of  the Shire, and as he had lived there  in childhood  his
going back would at least seem credible.
Gandalf  stayed in the Shire for over two months.  Then one evening, at
the end of  June, soon  after Frodo's  plan  had  been finally  arranged, he
suddenly  announced that  he was going off  again next morning.  'Only for a
short  while, I hope,'  he said.  'But  I am  going down beyond the southern
borders to get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.'
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried.
'Has anything happened?' he asked.
'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs
looking into. If I think it necessary after all  for you to get off at once,
I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick
to your plan; but be more careful than ever, especially of the  Ring. Let me
impress on you once more:           don't use it!'
He  went off at dawn.  'I may be back any day,'  he  said. 'At the very
latest I shall come back  for  the farewell party. I think after all you may
need my company on the Road.'
At first  Frodo  was a  good deal  disturbed,  and wondered often  what
Gandalf could  have  heard; but his  uneasiness wore  off, and in  the  fine
weather  he forgot his  troubles for a  while. The  Shire had seldom seen so
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey
was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full.
Autumn was well under  way  before  Frodo began to worry  about Gandalf
again.  September  was  passing  and there  was  still no  news of him.  The
Birthday, and the removal, drew  nearer, and still he did not come,  or send
word.  Bag End began to be busy.  Some of Frodo's friends  came  to stay and
help  him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco  Boffin, and
of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between
them
they turned the whole place upside-down.
On  September  20th  two  covered  carts  went off  laden  to Buckland,
conveying  the furniture and goods that Frodo had not  sold to his new home,
by way of the  Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became  really anxious,
and kept  a constant look-out  for  Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning,
dawned as fair and  clear  as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was
quite small, just  a  dinner  for himself  and his four helpers; but  he was
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought  that he would so soon have
to part  with his young  friends weighed  on his heart. He  wondered how  he
would break it to them.
The four younger  hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf's absence. The dining-room was
bare except for a table  and  chairs,  but the food  was good, and there was
good  wine:  Frodo's  wine  had  not  been  included  in  the  sale  to  the
Sackville-Bagginses.
'Whatever happens to  the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s  get  their
claws on  it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as
he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.
When they had sung many songs, and talked of  many things they had done
together,  they toasted  Bilbo's birthday, and  they  drank his  health  and
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then  they went to bed.  Frodo's party
was over, and Gandalf had not come.
The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the remainder
of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off with Fatty (that is
Fredegar  Bolger).  'Someone must get there and  warm the house  before  you
arrive,' said Merry. 'Well, see you later - the day  after tomorrow,  if you
don't go to sleep on the way!'
Folco went  home  after lunch,  but Pippin remained behind.  Frodo  was
restless and anxious,  listening in vain for a  sound of Gandalf. He decided
to  wait until  nightfall. After that,  if  Gandalf wanted him urgently,  he
would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going
on foot. His plan - for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any
other reason  -  was to walk from Hobbiton to  Bucklebury  Ferry, taking  it
fairly easy.
'I shall  get  myself a bit  into  training,  too,' he said, looking at
himself  in  a dusty mirror in the  half-empty  hall.  He  had  not done any
strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection  looked rather flabby,
he thought.
After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son,
Lotho, turned  up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said  Lobelia,
as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of
Bag  End  did not take effect  until  midnight.  But Lobelia  can perhaps be
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years  longer for
Bag End  than she once hoped, and she was now  a  hundred years old.
Anyway,
she had  come to see that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and
she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought
a complete inventory  with her and went  right through  it. In  the end  she
departed with Lotho and  the spare  key and  the promise that the  other key
would  be  left at  the  Gamgees' in Bagshot Row.  She  snorted, and  showed
plainly that she  thought the Gamgees  capable of plundering the hole during
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.
He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee  in the  kitchen. It had
been  officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland  'to  do for  Mr.
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia
as a neighbour.
'Our  last meal at  Bag End!'  said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They
left the washing up  for Lobelia.  Pippin  and Sam  strapped  up their three
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last  stroll in the
garden. Sam disappeared.
The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled.
Frodo
wandered round the familiar rooms,  and saw the light  of the sunset fade on
the walls,  and  shadows  creep out  of  the  corners.  It  grew slowly dark
indoors. He went out and walked down to  the gate at the bottom of the path,
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to  see Gandalf
come striding up through the dusk.
The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. 'It's going  to be
a fine night,'  he  said  aloud.  'That's good for a beginning.  I feel like
