going to battle together.'
Even  as the old wizard  spoke,  the great horse  came striding up  the
slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowing in the wind
of his speed. The two others followed, now  far behind. As soon as Shadowfax
saw Gandalf, he checked his  pace and  whinnied loudly; then trotting gently
forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the
old man's neck.
Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a  long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he
said;  'but you are wise and swift and  come at need.  Far let us  ride  now
together, and part not in this world again!'
Soon  the other horses  came up  and stood quietly  by, as if  awaiting
orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the  hall of your master, Thjoden,' said
Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads.  'Time presses, so
with your leave, my friends, we  will ride. We beg you to use  all the speed
that  you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli
before me, and by  his leave  Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now
only to drink a little.'
'Now I understand a part of last night's  riddle,' said Legolas  as  he
sprang lightly  upon Arod's back.  'Whether they  fled  at first in fear, or
not,  our horses met  Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with  joy.
Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?'
'Yes, I knew,'  said the wizard.  'I bent  my thought upon him, bidding
him to  make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of this land.
Swiftly may he bear me back again!'
Gandalf spoke  now to Shadowfax, and  the horse set off at a good pace,
yet  not  beyond the measure of the  others. After a little while  he turned
suddenly, and  choosing  a place where the banks  were  lower, he waded  the
river, and then led them away due south into a flat land, treeless and wide.
The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of  grass. There was
no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter.
'He is  steering a straight course now for  the halls of Thjoden  under
the slopes of the White  Mountains,' said  Gandalf. 'It will be  quicker so.
The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies,
across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.'
For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the
grass was so high  that it  reached above the knees of the riders, and their
steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea. They came upon many
hidden
pools, and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and  treacherous bogs;  but
Shadowfax found the way, and the  other horses followed in his swath. Slowly
the sun  fell from the sky down into the  West. Looking  out  over the great
plain,  far away the riders saw it for a moment like a red fire sinking into
the grass. Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun's disc to the
hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed down under the rim
of earth.
'There lies the Gap of Rohan,' said Gandalf. 'It is now almost due west
of us. That way lies Isengard.'
'I see a great smoke,' said Legolas. 'What may that be?'
'Battle and war!' said Gandalf. 'Ride on!'
Chapter 6. The King of the Golden Hall
They rode on  through sunset,  and slow dusk, and gathering night. When
at last they  halted  and  dismounted,  even  Aragorn  was stiff and  weary.
Gandalf only allowed  them a few  hours' rest. Legolas and  Gimli  slept and
Aragorn lay flat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his
staff, gazing  into the darkness, east and  west.  All was silent, and there
was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds,
fleeting on a  chill wind, when  they  arose again. Under the cold moon they
went on once more, as swift as by the light of day.
Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen
from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod,
weary but proud, followed their  tireless leader, a grey shadow before  them
hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon  sank into the  cloudy
West.
A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark  faded to
a  cold grey. Red  shafts of light leapt  above  the black walls of the Emyn
Muil  far  away upon  their  left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind  swept
across  their path,  rushing through the  bent  grasses.  Suddenly Shadowfax
stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead.
'Look!' he  cried, and  they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood
the mountains  of  the South:  white-tipped  and  streaked  with black.  The
grass-lands  rolled against  the  hills  that clustered  at their feet,  and
flowed up into many valleys still  dim and  dark, untouched  by the light of
dawn,  winding  their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately
before  the travellers the widest of these  glens  opened  like a  long gulf
among the hills. Far inward they  glimpsed a tumbled mountain-mass with  one
tall peak;  at the mouth of  the  vale there  stood  like  sentinel a lonely
height. About its feet  there flowed, as a thread of silver, the stream that
issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still  far away, a glint in
the rising sun, a  glimmer of gold. 'Speak, Legolas!' said Gandalf. 'Tell us
what you see there before us!'
Legolas  gazed  ahead, shading  his eyes from the  level shafts  of the
new-risen  sun. 'I see a  white stream  that comes down from  the snows,' he
said. 'Where it issues  from the shadow  of the vale a green hill rises upon
