Chapter 6. The King of the Golden Hall
They rode on  through sunset,  and slow dusk, and gathering night. When
at last they  halted  and  dismounted,  even  Aragorn  was stiff and  weary.
Gandalf only allowed  them a few  hours' rest. Legolas and  Gimli  slept and
Aragorn lay flat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his
staff, gazing  into the darkness, east and  west.  All was silent, and there
was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds,
fleeting on a  chill wind, when  they  arose again. Under the cold moon they
went on once more, as swift as by the light of day.
Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen
from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod,
weary but proud, followed their  tireless leader, a grey shadow before  them
hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon  sank into the  cloudy
West.
A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark  faded to
a  cold grey. Red  shafts of light leapt  above  the black walls of the Emyn
Muil  far  away upon  their  left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind  swept
across  their path,  rushing through the  bent  grasses.  Suddenly Shadowfax
stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead.
'Look!' he  cried, and  they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood
the mountains  of  the South:  white-tipped  and  streaked  with black.  The
grass-lands  rolled against  the  hills  that clustered  at their feet,  and
flowed up into many valleys still  dim and  dark, untouched  by the light of
dawn,  winding  their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately
before  the travellers the widest of these  glens  opened  like a  long gulf
among the hills. Far inward they  glimpsed a tumbled mountain-mass with  one
tall peak;  at the mouth of  the  vale there  stood  like  sentinel a lonely
height. About its feet  there flowed, as a thread of silver, the stream that
issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still  far away, a glint in
the rising sun, a  glimmer of gold. 'Speak, Legolas!' said Gandalf. 'Tell us
what you see there before us!'
Legolas  gazed  ahead, shading  his eyes from the  level shafts  of the
new-risen  sun. 'I see a  white stream  that comes down from  the snows,' he
said. 'Where it issues  from the shadow  of the vale a green hill rises upon
the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within  there
rise the  roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there
stands  aloft  a  great  hall of Men. And it  seems to  my eyes  that it  is
thatched with gold. The light  of it shines  far over the land. Golden, too,
are the posts of its  doors. There men  in bright  mail stand; but all  else
within the courts are yet asleep.'
'Edoras  those courts are called,' said Gandalf, 'and Meduseld  is that
golden hall. There dwells Thjoden son of Thengel, King of the Mark of Rohan.
We  are come  with the  rising  of  the day.  Now the road lies plain to see
before us.  But  we  must  ride  more  warily; for  war  is abroad,  and the
Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even if it seem so from afar.  Draw
no  weapon, speak no  haughty  word,  I  counsel you all, until we  are come
before Thjoden's seat.'
The  morning was  bright and clear about them, and birds were  singing,
when the  travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly into the plain,
and beyond the feet  of  the hills  turned across their path in a wide bend,
flowing away east to  feed the Entwash far off in  its reed-choked beds. The
land was green: in the wet meads and along  the grassy borders of the stream
grew many willow-trees. Already in this southern land they were blushing red
at  their fingertips. Feeling  the approach of spring. Over the stream there
was a ford  between low banks  much trampled by the  passage of horses.  The
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the
uplands.
At the  foot of the  walled  hill the  way ran under the shadow of many
mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was white as with
a drifted snow: small flowers  sprang there like  countless stars  amid  the
turf.
'Look!' said  Gandalf. 'How fair are  the  bright  eyes  in  the grass!
Evermind they  are called,         simbelmynl      in this land of Men, for they blossom
in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men rest. Behold! we are
come to the great barrows  where the sires of  Thjoden sleep.' 'Seven mounds
upon the left,  and nine upon the right,' said Aragorn. 'Many long  lives of
men it is since the golden hall was built.'
'Five hundred times  have the  red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home
since then,' said Legolas, 'and but a little while does that seem to us.'
'But  to the Riders of  the Mark it  seems  so long ago,' said Aragorn,
'that  the  raising of this  house  is but a memory of  song, and  the years
before are lost in the mist of time.  Now  they  call this land their  home,
their own, and  their speech is sundered  from their northern  kin.' Then he
began  to chant softly in a  slow tongue unknown to the  Elf  and Dwarf; yet
they listened, for there was a strong music in it.
'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it
is like  to  this land itself; rich and rolling in part,  and else  hard and
stern as the mountains.  But I cannot guess what it  means, save  that it is
laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.'
'It runs thus  in  the Common Speech,' said Aragorn, 'as near as  I can
make it.
Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?
Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing?
Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing?
Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?
They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow;
The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.
Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning,
Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning?
Thus spoke a  forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall  and
fair  was Eorl the Young,  who rode  down out  of the  North; and there were
wings upon the feet  of  his steed, Felaruf, father  of horses. So men still
sing in the evening.'
With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the
winding way  up the  green shoulders  of the hills, they came at last to the
wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.
There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and
barred  the  way with spears.  'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in
the tongue  of  the  Riddermark,  demanding  the  names and  errand  of  the
strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked
darkly upon Gandalf.
'Well do I  understand your speech,' he answered  in the same language;
'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue,
as
is the custom in the West, if you wish to be answered?'
'It is the will of Thjoden King that  none should enter his gates, save
those who know our tongue and are our friends,'  replied one of the  guards.
'None are welcome here in days of war but our  own folk, and those that come
