before are lost in the mist of time.  Now  they  call this land their  home,
their own, and  their speech is sundered  from their northern  kin.' Then he
began  to chant softly in a  slow tongue unknown to the  Elf  and Dwarf; yet
they listened, for there was a strong music in it.
'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it
is like  to  this land itself; rich and rolling in part,  and else  hard and
stern as the mountains.  But I cannot guess what it  means, save  that it is
laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.'
'It runs thus  in  the Common Speech,' said Aragorn, 'as near as  I can
make it.
Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?
Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing?
Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing?
Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?
They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow;
The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.
Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning,
Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning?
Thus spoke a  forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall  and
fair  was Eorl the Young,  who rode  down out  of the  North; and there were
wings upon the feet  of  his steed, Felaruf, father  of horses. So men still
sing in the evening.'
With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the
winding way  up the  green shoulders  of the hills, they came at last to the
wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.
There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and
barred  the  way with spears.  'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in
the tongue  of  the  Riddermark,  demanding  the  names and  errand  of  the
strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked
darkly upon Gandalf.
'Well do I  understand your speech,' he answered  in the same language;
'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue,
as
is the custom in the West, if you wish to be answered?'
'It is the will of Thjoden King that  none should enter his gates, save
those who know our tongue and are our friends,'  replied one of the  guards.
'None are welcome here in days of war but our  own folk, and those that come
from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over
the
plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own  horses? Long  have
we kept  guard here,  and we  have watched you from afar. Never have we seen
other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is  one of these that
bear  you.  He is One  of the         Mearas    , unless our eyes  are cheated  by some
spell. Say, are you not a wizard,  some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his
craft? Speak now and be swift!'
'We are  no phantoms,' said Aragorn, 'nor do your  eyes  cheat you. For
indeed these are your own horses  that  we ride, as  you  knew well are  you
asked, I  guess. But seldom  does thief  ride  home to the  stable. Here are
Hasufel and Arod, that Jomer,  the  Third Marshal  of the Mark,  lent to us,
only two  days ago. We bring them back now, even as we promised him. Has
not
Jomer then returned and given warning of our coming?'
A troubled look came  into the guard's eyes. 'Of Jomer I have naught to
say,' he answered. 'If  what you tell me  is  truth,  then doubtless Thjoden
will  have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is
but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and  said that by  the will of
Thjoden no stranger should pass these gates.'
'Wormtongue?' said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. 'Say no more!
My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in
haste. Will you not go or send to say  that  we  are come?' His eyes glinted
under his deep brows as he bent his gaze upon the man.
'Yes,  I will go,' he answered  slowly. 'But what names shall I report?
And what  shall I say of you? Old  and weary you seem now, and yet  you  are
fell and grim beneath, I deem'
'Well do you see and speak,' said the wizard. 'For I am Gandalf. I have
returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is Shadowfax the Great,
whom no other hand can tame. And here beside me  is Aragorn son of
Arathorn,
the heir of Kings, and it is to Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas
the Elf and Gimli the  Dwarf, our  comrades. Go now and  say to your  master
that we are at  his gates and  would have speech with him, if he will permit
us to come into his hall.' 'Strange names you give indeed! But I will report
them as you  bid and learn my master's will,' said  the  guard. 'Wait here a
little  while, and f will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do not
hope  too much!  These are dark  days.' He  went  swiftly away,  leaving the
strangers  in the  watchful  keeping of his  comrades. After  some  time  he
returned. 'Follow me!'  he said. 'Thjoden gives you leave  to enter; but any
weapon that  you bear; be it only a  staff, you must leave on the threshold.
The doorwardens will keep them.'
The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking in file
behind their guide. They found  a broad path, paved  with hewn  stones,  now
winding  upward,  now climbing in  short  flights of well-laid  steps.  Many
houses  built of wood and many dark doors they passed. Beside the  way in  a
stone  channel a stream of clear water flowed,  sparkling and chattering. At
length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above
a  green terrace,  at the foot of which a bright  spring gushed from a stone
carved in the likeness of a  horse's  head;  beneath was  a  wide basin from
which the  water. spilled and fed the  falling stream. Up the  green terrace
went a stair of stone, high  and  broad, and  on either side of the  topmost
step were stone-hewn  sea,  There sat other  guards,  with drawn swords laid
upon their  knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the  sun
was blazoned upon  their green shields, their  long  corslets were burnished
bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men.
'There are the doors before you,' said the guide. 'I must return now to
my duty at the gate. Farewell! And  may the Lord  of the Mark be gracious to
you!'
He turned and went swiftly  back down  the road. The others climbed the
long stair under the eyes of the tall  watchmen. Silent they stood now above
and spoke no  word, until Gandalf stepped  out upon the paved terrace at the
stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting
in their own tongue.
Hail, corners from afar!' they said, and they turned the hilts of their
swords towards the travellers in token of  peace. Green  gems flashed in the
sunlight.  Then one of the guards stepped forward  and  spoke in  the Common
Speech.
'I am the Doorward of Thjoden,' he said. 'Hbma is my name. Here  I must
bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.'
Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver and
his bow. 'Keep these well,' he said, 'for they come from the Golden Wood and
the Lady of Lothlurien gave them to me.'
Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the
