hope  too much!  These are dark  days.' He  went  swiftly away,  leaving the
strangers  in the  watchful  keeping of his  comrades. After  some  time  he
returned. 'Follow me!'  he said. 'Thjoden gives you leave  to enter; but any
weapon that  you bear; be it only a  staff, you must leave on the threshold.
The doorwardens will keep them.'
The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking in file
behind their guide. They found  a broad path, paved  with hewn  stones,  now
winding  upward,  now climbing in  short  flights of well-laid  steps.  Many
houses  built of wood and many dark doors they passed. Beside the  way in  a
stone  channel a stream of clear water flowed,  sparkling and chattering. At
length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above
a  green terrace,  at the foot of which a bright  spring gushed from a stone
carved in the likeness of a  horse's  head;  beneath was  a  wide basin from
which the  water. spilled and fed the  falling stream. Up the  green terrace
went a stair of stone, high  and  broad, and  on either side of the  topmost
step were stone-hewn  sea,  There sat other  guards,  with drawn swords laid
upon their  knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the  sun
was blazoned upon  their green shields, their  long  corslets were burnished
bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men.
'There are the doors before you,' said the guide. 'I must return now to
my duty at the gate. Farewell! And  may the Lord  of the Mark be gracious to
you!'
He turned and went swiftly  back down  the road. The others climbed the
long stair under the eyes of the tall  watchmen. Silent they stood now above
and spoke no  word, until Gandalf stepped  out upon the paved terrace at the
stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting
in their own tongue.
Hail, corners from afar!' they said, and they turned the hilts of their
swords towards the travellers in token of  peace. Green  gems flashed in the
sunlight.  Then one of the guards stepped forward  and  spoke in  the Common
Speech.
'I am the Doorward of Thjoden,' he said. 'Hbma is my name. Here  I must
bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.'
Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver and
his bow. 'Keep these well,' he said, 'for they come from the Golden Wood and
the Lady of Lothlurien gave them to me.'
Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the
wall, as if he feared to handle them.  'No  man  will  touch them  I promise
you,' he said.
Aragorn stood a while hesitating. 'It is not my will,' he said, 'to put
aside my sword or to deliver And®ril to the hand of any other man.'
'It is the will of Thjoden,' said Hbma.
'It is not clear to  me that the  will of Thjoden son of  Thengel  even
though  he be lord of the  Mark, should prevail over the will of Aragorn son
of Arathorn, Elendil's heir of Gondor.'
'This  is the house of  Thjoden, not of Aragorn, even  were  he King of
Gondor in  the seat of  Denethor,' said Hbma, stepping  swiftly  before  the
doors  and barring the  way. His sword  was now  in  his  hand and the point
towards the strangers.
'This is idle talk,' said  Gandalf. 'Needless is Thjoden's demand,  but
it is useless to refuse. A king will have his  way  in his own hall,  be  it
folly or wisdom.'
'Truly,' said Aragorn. 'And I would do as  the master of the house bade
me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword but And®ril.'
'Whatever its name may be,' said Hbma, 'here you shall lay it,  if  you
would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.'
'Not alone!' said Gimli, fingering  the blade of his axe,  and  looking
darkly up at the  guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to
fell. 'Not alone!'
'Come, come!' said Gandalf. 'We are all friends here. Or should be; for
the laughter  of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is
pressing.  Here at least is       my  sword, goodman Hbma. Keep it well. Glamdring
it  is  called,  for the Elves made  it long ago.  Now  let me  pass.  Come,
Aragorn!'
Slowly Aragorn unbuckled  his belt  and  himself set  his sword upright
against the wall. 'Here I set it,' he  said; 'but I command you not to touch
it, nor to  permit any other to lay hand on  it. In this elvish heath dwells
the Blade  that was Broken and has been made again. Telchar first wrought it
in the deeps of time. Death shall come to any man that draws Elendil's sword
save Elendil's heir.'
The guard stepped back and looked with  amazement on Aragorn. 'It seems
that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten days he said. It
shall be, lord, as you command.
'Well,' said Gimli, 'if it  has And®ril to keep it company, my  axe may
stay here, too, without shame'; and  he laid it on the floor. 'Now then,  if
all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.'
The guard still  hesitated. 'Your staff,' he  said to Gandalf. 'Forgive
me, but that too must be left at the doors.'
'Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is
another. I am old. If I may  not  lean on my stick  as I go, then I will sit
out here, until it pleases Thjoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.'
Aragorn laughed. 'Every man has something too dear to trust to another.
But  would you  part an old  man from his support? Come, will you not let us
enter?'
'The staff  in the hand of a wizard may  be more  than a prop for  age'
said Hbma. He looked hard at  the ash-staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in
doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends
and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.'
The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly
inwards grumbling on  their great hinges. The travellers entered. Inside  it
seemed  dark and warm after the clear air  upon the hill.  The hall was long
and wide and filled  with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its
lofty roof. But  here and there bright  sunbeams fell  in glimmering  shafts
from  the  eastern windows, high under the deep eaves. Through the louver in
the roof, above the thin wisps  of  issuing smoke,  the sky showed  pale and
blue.  As their  eyes changed, the travellers  perceived  that the floor was
paved  with  stones  of  many  hues;  branching  runes  and strange  devices
intertwined  beneath their feet. They  saw now that  the pillars were richly
carved,  gleaming dully with gold and half-seen  colours.  Many woven cloths
were hung upon  the  walls,  and over their  wide spaces  marched figures of
ancient legend, some  dim with years,  some darkling in the shade. But  upon
one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a
great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was
lifted,  and its  nostrils were wide and red  as it neighed, smelling battle
afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees.
'Behold  Eorl the Young!'  said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North
to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.'
Now the four companions  went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning
upon the long hearth in  the midst of the hall. Then they halted. At the far
end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards  the doors, was
a dais with three steps; and  in the  middle of the dais was a great  gilded
