stay here, too, without shame'; and  he laid it on the floor. 'Now then,  if
all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.'
The guard still  hesitated. 'Your staff,' he  said to Gandalf. 'Forgive
me, but that too must be left at the doors.'
'Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is
another. I am old. If I may  not  lean on my stick  as I go, then I will sit
out here, until it pleases Thjoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.'
Aragorn laughed. 'Every man has something too dear to trust to another.
But  would you  part an old  man from his support? Come, will you not let us
enter?'
'The staff  in the hand of a wizard may  be more  than a prop for  age'
said Hbma. He looked hard at  the ash-staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in
doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends
and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.'
The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly
inwards grumbling on  their great hinges. The travellers entered. Inside  it
seemed  dark and warm after the clear air  upon the hill.  The hall was long
and wide and filled  with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its
lofty roof. But  here and there bright  sunbeams fell  in glimmering  shafts
from  the  eastern windows, high under the deep eaves. Through the louver in
the roof, above the thin wisps  of  issuing smoke,  the sky showed  pale and
blue.  As their  eyes changed, the travellers  perceived  that the floor was
paved  with  stones  of  many  hues;  branching  runes  and strange  devices
intertwined  beneath their feet. They  saw now that  the pillars were richly
carved,  gleaming dully with gold and half-seen  colours.  Many woven cloths
were hung upon  the  walls,  and over their  wide spaces  marched figures of
ancient legend, some  dim with years,  some darkling in the shade. But  upon
one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a
great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was
lifted,  and its  nostrils were wide and red  as it neighed, smelling battle
afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees.
'Behold  Eorl the Young!'  said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North
to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.'
Now the four companions  went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning
upon the long hearth in  the midst of the hall. Then they halted. At the far
end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards  the doors, was
a dais with three steps; and  in the  middle of the dais was a great  gilded
chair. Upon it sat a man so bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but
his white  hair was  long and thick and fell  in great braids from beneath a
thin golden circle set upon his brow.  In the centre upon his forehead shone
a single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees; but his
eyes  still  burned  with  a bright  light,  glinting  as  he  gazed at  the
strangers. Behind his  chair  stood  a woman clad in white. At his feet upon
the  steps sat  a  wizened  figure of a  man,  with  a  pale  wise face  and
heavy-lidded eyes.
There was a silence. The old  man  did not move in his chair. At length
Gandalf spoke.  'Hail, Thjoden son of Thengel!  I have returned. For behold!
the  storm  comes,  and now all  friends should  gather together,  lest each
singly be destroyed.'
Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black
staff  with a handle of  white bone; and now  the strangers  saw that,  bent
though he was, he was still tall and must in youth  have been high and proud
indeed.
'I greet you,'  he said,  'and maybe you look for welcome. But truth to
tell your welcome is  doubtful here,  Master Gandalf.  You have ever  been a
herald  of  woe. Troubles follow you like crows,  and ever  the oftener  the
worse. I will  not deceive  you: when I heard that Shadowfax had  come  back
riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but still more at the lack
of the rider; and when Jomer brought the  tidings that you  had gone at last
to your long home, I did not mourn. But news from afar is seldom sooth. Here
you  come  again! And with you come  evils  worse  than before, as  might be
expected. Why should I welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.'
Slowly
he sat down again in his chair.
'You speak justly, lord,'  said the pale man sitting upon the steps  of
the  dais. 'It is not  yet five  days since  the  bitter  tidings  came that
Thjodred your son was slain upon  the West  Marches: your right hand, Second
Marshal Of the Mark. In Jomer  there  is little trust. Few men would be left
to guard your walls, if  he had been allowed to rule.  And even now we learn
from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East. Such  is the hour in
which this wanderer chooses to return. Why indeed  should  we  welcome  you,
Master Stormcrow?          Lbthspell    I  name you,  Ill-news; and ill news is  an ill
guest they say.' He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment
and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes.
'You are  held wise, my friend Wormtongue,  and are  doubtless a  great
support to your master,' answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two  ways
may a man  come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be
such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.'
'That  is so,' said Wormtongue; 'but there is a  third kind: pickers of
bones, meddlers in other men's sorrows, carrion-fowl  that grow fat  on war.
What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now?
It
was  aid from  us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord
bade you  Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and  to the wonder of
all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to
some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not  too great.
I guess that it is  likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid
rather than  render  it. Do  you  bring men?  Do you bring  horses,  swords,
spears? That I  would call aid; that is our present need. But  who are these
that  follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey,  and you yourself
the most beggar-like of the four!'
'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Thjoden son of
Thengel,' said  Gandalf. 'Has not the  messenger from your gate reported the
names of my companions? Seldom  has any lord of  Rohan received  three
such
guests. Weapons they have  laid at your doors  that  are worth many a mortal
man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and
thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.'
'Then it  is true, as  Jomer reported, that  you are in league with the
Sorceress of the Golden Wood?'  said Wormtongue. 'It  is not  to be wondered
at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.'
Gimli  strode  a pace forward, but felt  suddenly  the hand  of Gandalf
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone.
In Dwimordene, in Lurien
Seldom have walked the feet of Men,
Few mortal eyes have seen the light
That lies there ever, long and bright.
Galadriel! Galadriel!
Clear is the water of your well;
White is the star in your white hand;
Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land
