'You are  held wise, my friend Wormtongue,  and are  doubtless a  great
support to your master,' answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two  ways
may a man  come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be
such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.'
'That  is so,' said Wormtongue; 'but there is a  third kind: pickers of
bones, meddlers in other men's sorrows, carrion-fowl  that grow fat  on war.
What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now?
It
was  aid from  us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord
bade you  Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and  to the wonder of
all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to
some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not  too great.
I guess that it is  likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid
rather than  render  it. Do  you  bring men?  Do you bring  horses,  swords,
spears? That I  would call aid; that is our present need. But  who are these
that  follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey,  and you yourself
the most beggar-like of the four!'
'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Thjoden son of
Thengel,' said  Gandalf. 'Has not the  messenger from your gate reported the
names of my companions? Seldom  has any lord of  Rohan received  three
such
guests. Weapons they have  laid at your doors  that  are worth many a mortal
man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and
thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.'
'Then it  is true, as  Jomer reported, that  you are in league with the
Sorceress of the Golden Wood?'  said Wormtongue. 'It  is not  to be wondered
at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.'
Gimli  strode  a pace forward, but felt  suddenly  the hand  of Gandalf
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone.
In Dwimordene, in Lurien
Seldom have walked the feet of Men,
Few mortal eyes have seen the light
That lies there ever, long and bright.
Galadriel! Galadriel!
Clear is the water of your well;
White is the star in your white hand;
Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land
In Dwimordene, in Lurien
More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men.
Thus Gandalf softly  sang, and then suddenly  he changed.  Casting  his
tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned  no longer on his staff; and he
spoke in a clear cold voice.  'The wise speak only  of what they know, Grnma
son of Gblmud. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and
keep
your forked tongue behind  your  teeth.  I  have not passed through fire and
death to bandy crooked words  with a serving-man till the  lightning falls.'
He raised his staff.  There was a roll of thunder. The  sunlight was blotted
out from the eastern  windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night.
The fire faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf could be seen,  standing white
and tall before the blackened hearth.
In the gloom they heard  the hiss  of  Wormtongue's voice:  'Did I  not
counsel you, lord, to forbid  his  staff? That fool, Hbma, has betrayed us!'
There was  a flash as if lightning had cloven the roof. Then all was silent.
Wormtongue sprawled on his face.
'Now Thjoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?' said Gandalf. 'Do
you ask for help?' He lifted his staff and pointed to a  high  window. There
the darkness  seemed  to clear, and  through the opening could be seen, high
and far, a patch of shining sky. 'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the
Mark; for better help you will not  find. No counsel have I to give to those
that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will
you  hear them? They are not for all  ears.  I bid you come out  before your
doors  and look abroad.  Too  long have  you sat in  shadows and  trusted to
twisted tales and crooked promptings.'
Slowly  Thjoden left his  chair. A faint light  grew in the hall again.
The  woman hastened to  the king's side, taking his arm, and with  faltering
steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly through the hall.
Wormtongue remained lying on the floor. They came to  the  doors and
Gandalf
knocked.
'Open!' he cried. 'The Lord of the Mark comes forth!'
The doors rolled  back  and a keen air  came whistling in.  A wind  was
blowing  on  the  hill.  'Send your guards down  to the stairs  foot,'  said
Gandalf. 'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.'
'Go, Jowyn sister-daughter!' said the  old king. 'The time for  fear is
past.'
The woman turned  and went slowly into  the house. As  she  passed  the
doors  she turned and looked back. Grave  and thoughtful  was her glance, as
she looked on the king with cool  pity in her eyes. Very fair was  her face,
and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall  she was in her
white  robe girt with  silver; but strong she seemed and  stern as steel,  a
daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the  full light of day
beheld  Jowyn, Lady of Rohan, and thought her fair, fair  and cold,  like  a
morning of  pale spring that  is not yet come to womanhood. And she  now was
suddenly  aware  of  him:  tall  heir  of kings,  wise  with  many  winters,
greycloaked.  Hiding a power that yet she felt.  For a moment still as stone
she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone.
'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon  your land!  Breathe the free
air again!'
From  the porch upon the top  of the high terrace they could see beyond
the stream the green fields of Rohan fading  into distant grey.  Curtains of
wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and  to the west was still
dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden
hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had
come  out of  the  East  was  receding, rolling away  southward to  the sea.
Suddenly through a rent  in  the clouds behind them a shaft  of sun  stabbed
down. The falling  showers  gleamed  like  silver,  and  far away the  river
glittered like a shimmering glass.
'It is not so dark here,' said Thjoden.
'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so  heavily on your  shoulders as
some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!'
From the  king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He
drew himself up, slowly, as a man  that is stiff from long bending over some
dull toil.  Now tall  and straight he stood,  and his  eyes were blue as  he
looked into the opening sky.
'Dark have  been  my  dreams  of late,' he said,  'but  I  feel as  one
new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that
already  you have come  too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not
long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall
devour the high seat. What is to be done?'
'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Jomer. Do I not guess rightly
that  you hold him prisoner,  by the counsel of Grnma, of him that all  save
