past.'
The woman turned  and went slowly into  the house. As  she  passed  the
doors  she turned and looked back. Grave  and thoughtful  was her glance, as
she looked on the king with cool  pity in her eyes. Very fair was  her face,
and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall  she was in her
white  robe girt with  silver; but strong she seemed and  stern as steel,  a
daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the  full light of day
beheld  Jowyn, Lady of Rohan, and thought her fair, fair  and cold,  like  a
morning of  pale spring that  is not yet come to womanhood. And she  now was
suddenly  aware  of  him:  tall  heir  of kings,  wise  with  many  winters,
greycloaked.  Hiding a power that yet she felt.  For a moment still as stone
she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone.
'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon  your land!  Breathe the free
air again!'
From  the porch upon the top  of the high terrace they could see beyond
the stream the green fields of Rohan fading  into distant grey.  Curtains of
wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and  to the west was still
dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden
hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had
come  out of  the  East  was  receding, rolling away  southward to  the sea.
Suddenly through a rent  in  the clouds behind them a shaft  of sun  stabbed
down. The falling  showers  gleamed  like  silver,  and  far away the  river
glittered like a shimmering glass.
'It is not so dark here,' said Thjoden.
'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so  heavily on your  shoulders as
some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!'
From the  king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He
drew himself up, slowly, as a man  that is stiff from long bending over some
dull toil.  Now tall  and straight he stood,  and his  eyes were blue as  he
looked into the opening sky.
'Dark have  been  my  dreams  of late,' he said,  'but  I  feel as  one
new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that
already  you have come  too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not
long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall
devour the high seat. What is to be done?'
'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Jomer. Do I not guess rightly
that  you hold him prisoner,  by the counsel of Grnma, of him that all  save
you name the Wormtongue?'
'It is  true,' said Thjoden. 'He  had rebelled against my commands, and
threatened death to Grnma in my hall.'
'A man  may love you  and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels' said
Gandalf.
'That may be. I will  do as you ask. Call  Hbma to  me. Since he proved
untrusty  as a  doorward, let him  become an errand-runner. The guilty shall
bring the guilty to judgement,' said Thjoden, and his voice was grim, yet he
looked  at  Gandalf and  smiled and  as  he did so many lines  of care  were
smoothed away and did not return.
When  Hbma  had  been  summoned and had  gone, Gandalf led Thjoden to
a
stone seat, and then sat  himself before  the  king upon  the topmost stair.
Aragorn and his companions stood nearby.
'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,' said Gandalf. 'Yet
if my  hope is not cheated, a time will come ere  long when I can speak more
fully. Behold! you  are  come into  a peril  greater  even  than the wit  of
Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see!  you  dream no longer.
You
live.  Gondor and  Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy  is strong beyond our
reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.'
Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice  was low and secret, and none save
the  king heard what he said. But  ever as he spoke the light shone brighter
in Thjoden's eye, and at  the last he rose from his seat to his full height,
and  Gandalf  beside him, and  together  they looked out from the high place
towards the East.
'Verily,' said Gandalf, now in a loud voice,  keen and clear, 'that way
lies our hope,  where sits our greatest  fear. Doom hangs still on a thread.
Yet  hope  there  is  still, if we can  but  stand  unconquered for a little
while.'
The others  too  now  turned their  eyes eastward.  Over the  sundering
leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope and fear
bore their thoughts  still on, beyond dark  mountains to the Land of Shadow.
Where now was the  Ring-bearer? How thin  indeed was  the thread  upon
which
doom  still hung! It seemed to Legolas, as he  strained his farseeing  eyes,
that he caught a  glint  of white: far away perchance the sun twinkled on  a
pinnacle of the  Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet
a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame.
Slowly  Thjoden  sat  down again,  as if  weariness still struggled  to
master  him against the will  of Gandalf.  He turned and looked at his great
house. 'Alas!'  he said, 'that these evil days  should  be  mine, and should
come in my old  age instead of that peace  which  I  have earned.  Alas  for
Boromir  the  brave!  The young  perish and the old  linger,  withering.' He
clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands.
'Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped
a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf.
Thjoden rose and put his  hand to his  side;  but no sword hung at  his
belt. 'Where has Grnma stowed it?' he muttered under his breath.
'Take this,  dear lord!'  said  a  clear  voice.  'It  was ever at your
service.' Two  men had  come softly up the  stair and stood now a few  steps
from the top. Jomer was there. No helm was on his head, no  mail  was on his
breast, but in  his hand he  held a drawn sword; and as he knelt  he offered
the hilt to his master.
'How comes this?' said Thjoden sternly. He turned towards Jomer and the
men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the
old
man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick?
'It is my doing,  lord,' said Hbma,  trembling. I understood that Jomer
was  to be set free. Such  joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred. Yet,
since  he was free again, and he  a  Marshal of  the Mark,!  brought him his
sword as he bade me.'
'To lay at your feet, my lord,' said Jomer.
For a moment of silence Thjoden stood looking down at Jomer as he knelt
still before him. Neither moved.
'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf.
Slowly Thjoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers  took the hilt,
it seemed  to the watchers that  firmness  and strength returned to his thin
arm. Suddenly he  lifted the blade  and swung it shimmering and whistling in
the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the
tongue of Rohan a call to arms.
Arise now, arise, Riders of Thjoden!
Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.
Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!
