pinnacle of the  Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet
a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame.
Slowly  Thjoden  sat  down again,  as if  weariness still struggled  to
master  him against the will  of Gandalf.  He turned and looked at his great
house. 'Alas!'  he said, 'that these evil days  should  be  mine, and should
come in my old  age instead of that peace  which  I  have earned.  Alas  for
Boromir  the  brave!  The young  perish and the old  linger,  withering.' He
clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands.
'Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped
a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf.
Thjoden rose and put his  hand to his  side;  but no sword hung at  his
belt. 'Where has Grnma stowed it?' he muttered under his breath.
'Take this,  dear lord!'  said  a  clear  voice.  'It  was ever at your
service.' Two  men had  come softly up the  stair and stood now a few  steps
from the top. Jomer was there. No helm was on his head, no  mail  was on his
breast, but in  his hand he  held a drawn sword; and as he knelt  he offered
the hilt to his master.
'How comes this?' said Thjoden sternly. He turned towards Jomer and the
men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the
old
man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick?
'It is my doing,  lord,' said Hbma,  trembling. I understood that Jomer
was  to be set free. Such  joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred. Yet,
since  he was free again, and he  a  Marshal of  the Mark,!  brought him his
sword as he bade me.'
'To lay at your feet, my lord,' said Jomer.
For a moment of silence Thjoden stood looking down at Jomer as he knelt
still before him. Neither moved.
'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf.
Slowly Thjoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers  took the hilt,
it seemed  to the watchers that  firmness  and strength returned to his thin
arm. Suddenly he  lifted the blade  and swung it shimmering and whistling in
the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the
tongue of Rohan a call to arms.
Arise now, arise, Riders of Thjoden!
Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.
Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!
Forth Eorlingas!
The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. They
looked at  their lord  in amazement, and  then  as one  man they  drew their
swords and laid them at his feet. 'Command us!' they said.
' Westu Thjoden hbl!     ' cried Jomer. 'It  is a joy to us to see you return
into your  own.  Never  again  shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only
with grief!'
'Take  back your sword, Jomer, sister-son!'  said  the king. 'Go, Hbma,
and  seek my own sword!  Grnma has it in his keeping. Bring him to  me also.
Now, Gandalf,  you said  that  you had counsel to  give, if I would hear it.
What is your counsel?'
'You have yourself already  taken it,' answered Gandalf.  'To put  your
trust in Jomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind.  To cast aside  regret
and fear.  To do the deed at hand. Every  man that can ride should  be  sent
west at once, as  Jomer counselled you: we must first destroy the  threat of
Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we  fall. If we succeed -- then  we
will  face the next task. Meanwhile your people that are left, the women and
the children and the old, should stay  to the refuges  that  you have in the
mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let
them  take  provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves  with treasures,
great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.'
'This counsel seems good to me now,' said Thjoden. 'Let all my folk get
ready! But  you my guests-truly you  said, Gandalf, that the  courtesy of my
hall is  lessened. You have ridden through the night,  and the morning wears
away.  You have had  neither  sleep nor food. A  guest-house  shall be  made
ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.'
'Nay, lord,' said Aragorn. 'There is no rest yet for the weary. The men
of Rohan must ride forth today, and we  will ride with them, axe, sword, and
bow. We did not bring them to rest against your wall, Lord  of the Mark. And
I promised Jomer that my sword and his should be drawn together.'
'Now indeed there is hope of victory!' said Jomer.
'Hope,  yes,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard  is strong. And  other perils
draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Thjoden,  when we are gone. Lead your people
swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!'
'Nay,  Gandalf!' said  the king.  'You do not know your  own  skill  in
healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall  in  the front
of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.'
'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn.
The armed men that stood  near clashed their weapons, crying:  'The  Lord of
the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!'
'But  your  people  must  not be  both  unarmed and shepherdless'  said
Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?'
'I will take thought for that  ere I go,' answered Thjoden. 'Here comes
my counsellor.'
At  that moment  Hbma  came  again from  the hall. Behind him  cringing
between two other men, came Grnma  the  Wormtongue. His face was very
white.
His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Hbma knelt and presented to Thjoden a long
sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and  set with green gems. 'Here, lord,
is Herugrim, your  ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth
was  he to render up  the  keys. Many other things are there which  men have
missed.'
'You lie,'  said Wormtongue.  'And  this sword your master himself gave
into my keeping.'
'And  he  now  requires  it  of  you again,' said  Thjoden. 'Does  that
displease you?'
'Assuredly not. lord,' said  Wormtongue. 'I care for you and  yours  as
best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let
others deal  with these irksome guests. Your meat is  about to be set on the
board. Will you not go to it?'
'I will,' said Thjoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board
beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all
who dwell nigh!  Every  man and strong lad able to bear  arms,  all who have
horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from
noon!'
'Dear  lord!'  cried Wormtongue.  'It  is as I feared. This wizard  has
bewitched  you.  Are  none  to  be  left to defend  the  Golden Hall of your
fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?'
'If this is bewitchment,' said Thjoden, 'it seems to me more  wholesome
than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on
all  fours like  a beast.  No, not  one shall be left, not even Grnma. Grnma
shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword.'
'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue,  grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity
on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will
