'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn.
The armed men that stood  near clashed their weapons, crying:  'The  Lord of
the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!'
'But  your  people  must  not be  both  unarmed and shepherdless'  said
Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?'
'I will take thought for that  ere I go,' answered Thjoden. 'Here comes
my counsellor.'
At  that moment  Hbma  came  again from  the hall. Behind him  cringing
between two other men, came Grnma  the  Wormtongue. His face was very
white.
His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Hbma knelt and presented to Thjoden a long
sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and  set with green gems. 'Here, lord,
is Herugrim, your  ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth
was  he to render up  the  keys. Many other things are there which  men have
missed.'
'You lie,'  said Wormtongue.  'And  this sword your master himself gave
into my keeping.'
'And  he  now  requires  it  of  you again,' said  Thjoden. 'Does  that
displease you?'
'Assuredly not. lord,' said  Wormtongue. 'I care for you and  yours  as
best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let
others deal  with these irksome guests. Your meat is  about to be set on the
board. Will you not go to it?'
'I will,' said Thjoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board
beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all
who dwell nigh!  Every  man and strong lad able to bear  arms,  all who have
horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from
noon!'
'Dear  lord!'  cried Wormtongue.  'It  is as I feared. This wizard  has
bewitched  you.  Are  none  to  be  left to defend  the  Golden Hall of your
fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?'
'If this is bewitchment,' said Thjoden, 'it seems to me more  wholesome
than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on
all  fours like  a beast.  No, not  one shall be left, not even Grnma. Grnma
shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword.'
'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue,  grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity
on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will
stand by you  when all  others have gone.  Do  not send your  faithful Grnma
away!'
'You have my pity,' said Thjoden. 'And I do not send you from my  side.
I  go myself to  war with my  men.  I  bid  you come with me and prove  your
faith.'
Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of
a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked his lips with
a  long pale tongue. 'Such a resolve  might be expected  from a lord of  the
House  of Eorl,  old though  he be,' he  said. 'But those who truly love him
would spare his failing years. Yet I  see that I come too late. Others, whom
the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded  him.
If I cannot undo their work,  hear me at least in  this, lord! One who knows
your mind  and honours your  commands should  be  left in  Edoras. Appoint a
faithful  steward.  Let your  counsellor Grnma  keep  all  things till  your
return-and  I pray  that we  may  see it,  though no  wise man  will deem it
hopeful.'
Jomer  laughed. 'And if  that plea does not excuse you  from war,  most
noble Wormtongue,' he said, what office of less honour would you accept?  To
carry a sack of meal up  into the mountains-if any man would trust you  with
it?'
'Nay,  Jomer,  you  do  not  fully  understand   the  mind   of  Master
Wormtongue,' said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. 'He is bold
and cunning. Even now he plays a game with  peril and wins a throw. Hours of
my precious time he has wasted already. 'Down snake!' he said suddenly in  a
terrible voice. 'Down on  your belly!  How long is it  since  Saruman bought
you? What was  the promised price? When all the  men were  dead, you were to
pick your  share of  the treasure, and take the woman  you  desire? Too long
have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.'
Jomer grasped his sword. 'That I knew  already,' he muttered. 'For that
reason I would  have slain him  before,  forgetting the law of the hall. But
there are other reasons.' He  stepped forward,  but Gandalf stayed him  with
his hand.
'Jowyn is safe now,' he said. 'But you, Wormtongue,  you have done what
you could for  your  true master.  Some reward you have earned at least. Yet
Saruman is apt to  overlook his bargains. I should advise you  to go quickly
and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.'
'You lie,' said Wormtongue.
'That word comes too oft and easy from  your lips,' said Gandalf. 'I do
not lie. See, Thjoden, here is a snake! With  safety you cannot take it with
you,  nor can you leave it behind. To slay it  would be just. But it was not
always as it now is. Once it was a man,  and did you service in its fashion.
Give him a horse and  let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice
you shall judge him.'
'Do  you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Thjoden. 'This is your choice: to
ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go
now,  whither  you will. But  then, if ever we  meet again, I  shall not  be
merciful.'
Slowly Wormtongue rose. He  looked  at them with half-closed eyes. Last
of all he scanned Thjoden's face and opened his mouth  as if  to speak. Then
suddenly he drew  himself up.  His  hands  worked. His eyes glittered.  Such
malice was in them that men stepped  back from  him. He bared his teeth; and
then with a  hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and  darting  to
one side, he fled down the stair.
'After him!' said Thjoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not
hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.'
'And if any will bear him,' said Jomer.
One of the guards ran down the stair.  Another went to the  well at the
foot of  the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the
stones that Wormtongue had defiled.
'Now my guests, come!' said Thjoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as
haste allows.'
They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in
the town the heralds crying and the  war-horns  blowing. For the king was to
ride forth as soon as the  men of the  town and those dwelling near could be
armed and assembled.
At the  king's  board sat  Jomer  and  the four guests, and there  also
waiting  upon  the king was  the lady Jowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The
others were silent while Thjoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman.
'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?' said Gandalf. 'He was
not always evil. Once  I  do not doubt that he  was the friend of Rohan; and
even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now
he  has plotted  your  ruin, wearing the  mask of Friendship,  until  he was
ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that  you did  was
swiftly known in Isengard; for your  land  was  open, and strangers came and
