'That word comes too oft and easy from  your lips,' said Gandalf. 'I do
not lie. See, Thjoden, here is a snake! With  safety you cannot take it with
you,  nor can you leave it behind. To slay it  would be just. But it was not
always as it now is. Once it was a man,  and did you service in its fashion.
Give him a horse and  let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice
you shall judge him.'
'Do  you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Thjoden. 'This is your choice: to
ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go
now,  whither  you will. But  then, if ever we  meet again, I  shall not  be
merciful.'
Slowly Wormtongue rose. He  looked  at them with half-closed eyes. Last
of all he scanned Thjoden's face and opened his mouth  as if  to speak. Then
suddenly he drew  himself up.  His  hands  worked. His eyes glittered.  Such
malice was in them that men stepped  back from  him. He bared his teeth; and
then with a  hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and  darting  to
one side, he fled down the stair.
'After him!' said Thjoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not
hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.'
'And if any will bear him,' said Jomer.
One of the guards ran down the stair.  Another went to the  well at the
foot of  the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the
stones that Wormtongue had defiled.
'Now my guests, come!' said Thjoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as
haste allows.'
They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in
the town the heralds crying and the  war-horns  blowing. For the king was to
ride forth as soon as the  men of the  town and those dwelling near could be
armed and assembled.
At the  king's  board sat  Jomer  and  the four guests, and there  also
waiting  upon  the king was  the lady Jowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The
others were silent while Thjoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman.
'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?' said Gandalf. 'He was
not always evil. Once  I  do not doubt that he  was the friend of Rohan; and
even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now
he  has plotted  your  ruin, wearing the  mask of Friendship,  until  he was
ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that  you did  was
swiftly known in Isengard; for your  land  was  open, and strangers came and
went. And  ever Wormtongue's  whispering was  in your ears,  poisoning  your
thought, chilling your heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and
could do nothing, for your will was in his keeping.
'But  when I escaped and  warned you, then the mask was torn, for those
who would see. After  that Wormtongue played dangerously, always  seeking
to
delay  you, to  prevent  your full strength being gathered.  He  was crafty:
dulling men's  wariness, or working on their fears,  as served the occasion.
Do you not remember how eagerly  he urged  that no man should be spared on
a
wildgoose  chase  northward,  when  the  immediate  peril was  westward?  He
persuaded you  to  forbid Jomer to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Jomer had not
defied  Wormtongue's voice speaking  with your mouth, those Orcs would
have
reached Isengard by now,  bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which
Saruman desires  above all else, but at the least two members of my Company,
sharers of a  secret hope, of  which even  to you,  lord, I cannot yet speak
openly. Dare you think of what they might now be  suffering, or what Saruman
might now have learned to our destruction?'
'I owe much to  Jomer,' said Thjoden. 'Faithful heart  may have forward
tongue.' 'Say also,' said  Gandalf,  'that to crooked  eyes truth may wear a
wry face.'
'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,' said Thjoden. 'Most of all I owe to
you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere
we  go, at your own  choosing. You  have only to name aught  that is mine. I
reserve now only my sword!'
'Whether I came in time or not is yet  to be  seen,' said Gandalf. 'But
as for your gift, lord, I will choose  one that will fit my need: swift  and
sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was  only lent  before, if loan we may  call it.
But now shall ride  him into great hazard,  setting silver against  black: I
would not risk anything that is not my own.  And already there is  a bond of
love between us.'
'You choose  well,' said Thjoden; 'and I give him now gladly. Yet it is
a great  gift. There  is none like  to Shadowfax. In him  one of  the mighty
steeds of old  has returned. None  such shall  return again. And  to you  my
other guests I  will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords
you  do  not need,  but there  are helms and coats  of mail of cunning work,
gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they
serve you well!'
Now men came bearing  raiment  of  war from  the  king's hoard and they
arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round
shields: their bosses were  overlaid with gold and set with gems,  green and
red  and white.  Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of  rings,
even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in
the hoards of Edoras  of  better make than his short corslet forged  beneath
the Mountain  in the North.  But he  chose a  cap of iron  and leather  that
fitted well upon his  round head; and  a small  shield he also took. It bore
the  running  horse,  white upon green, that was the emblem of  the House of
Eorl.
'May it keep you well!' said Thjoden.  'It was made for me in Thengel's
day, while still I was a boy.'
Gimli bowed.  'I am proud, Lord  of the Mark, to bear your  device,' he
said. 'Indeed  sooner would I bear a  horse than be borne by one. I  love my
feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.'
'It may well be so,' said Thjoden.
The king now rose, and at once Jowyn came forward bearing wine. '                     Ferthu
Thjoden hbl!     ' she  said. 'Receive  now this  cup  and drink  in happy  hour.
Health be with thee at thy going and coming!'
Thjoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As
she stood before  Aragorn she paused suddenly and  looked  upon him, and her
eyes were shining. And he  looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as
he took the cup, his hand  met hers,  and he knew  that she trembled at  the
touch. 'Hail  Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of  Rohan!'  he
answered, but his face now was troubled and he did not smile.
When  they had  all drunk, the king went  down  the hall to  the doors.
There  the  guards awaited him, and  heralds  stood, and all  the  lords and
chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby.
'Behold! I  go forth, and  it  seems like to be  my last riding,'  said
Thjoden. 'I have  no  child. Thjodred  my  son  is  slain.  I name Jomer  my
sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as
you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I  leave behind,
to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?'
No man spoke.
'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?'
