fairly easy.
'I shall  get  myself a bit  into  training,  too,' he said, looking at
himself  in  a dusty mirror in the  half-empty  hall.  He  had  not done any
strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection  looked rather flabby,
he thought.
After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son,
Lotho, turned  up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said  Lobelia,
as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of
Bag  End  did not take effect  until  midnight.  But Lobelia  can perhaps be
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years  longer for
Bag End  than she once hoped, and she was now  a  hundred years old.
Anyway,
she had  come to see that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and
she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought
a complete inventory  with her and went  right through  it. In  the end  she
departed with Lotho and  the spare  key and  the promise that the  other key
would  be  left at  the  Gamgees' in Bagshot Row.  She  snorted, and  showed
plainly that she  thought the Gamgees  capable of plundering the hole during
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.
He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee  in the  kitchen. It had
been  officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland  'to  do for  Mr.
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia
as a neighbour.
'Our  last meal at  Bag End!'  said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They
left the washing up  for Lobelia.  Pippin  and Sam  strapped  up their three
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last  stroll in the
garden. Sam disappeared.
The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled.
Frodo
wandered round the familiar rooms,  and saw the light  of the sunset fade on
the walls,  and  shadows  creep out  of  the  corners.  It  grew slowly dark
indoors. He went out and walked down to  the gate at the bottom of the path,
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to  see Gandalf
come striding up through the dusk.
The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. 'It's going  to be
a fine night,'  he  said  aloud.  'That's good for a beginning.  I feel like
walking. I  can't  bear any  more  hanging about. I am going  to start,  and
Gandalf must follow  me.'  He  turned to go back, and  then  slopped, for he
heard voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was
certainly the old Gaffer's; the other was strange, and  somehow  unpleasant.
He could not make out what it said, but he heard the Gaffer's answers, which
were rather shrill. The old man seemed put out.
'No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went
with
him: anyway all  his stuff went.  Yes, sold out and  gone,  I tell'ee.  Why?
Why's none of my business, or yours.  Where to?  That ain't no  secret. He's
moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is - a tidy
way.  I've never been so far myself; they're  queer folks in Buckland. No, I
can't give no message. Good night to you!'
Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why  the fact
that they did not  come on up the Hill seemed a  great relief. 'I am sick of
questions and curiosity  about my doings,  I  suppose,' he thought. 'What an
inquisitive lot they all  are!' He had half a mind to go and ask  the Gaffer
who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and
walked quickly back to Bag End.
Pippin was sitting on his pack  in  the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo
stepped inside the dark door. 'Sam!' he called. 'Sam! Time!'
'Coming, sir!' came  the answer  from far within, followed soon by  Sam
himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the beer-barrel in
the cellar.
'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo.
'Yes, sir. I'll last for a bit now, sir.'
Frodo shut and locked the  round door, and  gave the key  to Sam.  'Run
down with this to your home, Sam!' he said. 'Then cut along the Row and meet
us as quick as you can at the gate in the  lane  beyond the meadows.  We are
not  going  through  the village  tonight.  Too  many ears pricking and eyes
prying.' Sam ran off at full speed.
'Well, now we're off at last!'  said Frodo. They shouldered their packs
and took up their sticks, and  walked round the corner to the  west  side of
Bag End. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He
waved
his hand, and then turned and (following Bilbo, if  he had known it) hurried
after Peregrin down  the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in  the
hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a
rustle in the grasses.
At the bottom of the  Hill  on its western  side they came  to the gate
opening on to a  narrow lane.  There they  halted and adjusted the straps of
their packs. Presently  Sam  appeared, trotting quickly and  breathing hard;
his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head
a tall shapeless fell  bag, which  he called  a hat. In the gloom  he looked
very much like a dwarf.
'I am sure you  have given me all the heaviest stuff,'  said Frodo.  'I
pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.'
'I could take a lot  more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,' said Sam
stoutly and untruthfully.
'No, you  don't,  Sam!' said  Pippin.  'It is  good  for him. He's  got
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own.'
'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as a
willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense.
I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it
at our next  packing.'  He  picked  up his  stick  again. 'Well, we all like
walking  in the dark,' he said,  'so let's put  some miles  behind us before
bed.'
For a short way they followed  the lane westwards. Then leaving it they
turned left and took quietly to  the  fields again. They went in single file
along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them.
In their  dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings.
Since they were  all hobbits, and were  trying  to be silent,  they made  no
noise that even hobbits would  hear. Even the wild things in  the fields and
woods hardly noticed their passing.
After  some  time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow
plank-bridge.  The stream  was  there no more than  a winding  black ribbon,
bordered with leaning  alder-trees. A mile or two further south they hastily
crossed the great  road  from  the Brandywine Bridge; they were  now in  the
Tookland and  bending south-eastwards they made for the  Green Hill Country.
As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and  saw the  lamps
in Hobbiton far off twinkling in  the gentle  valley of  the  Water. Soon it
disappeared  in the  folds of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater
beside  its grey pool. When the  light of  the  last  farm was  far  behind,
