gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they
serve you well!'
Now men came bearing  raiment  of  war from  the  king's hoard and they
arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round
shields: their bosses were  overlaid with gold and set with gems,  green and
red  and white.  Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of  rings,
even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in
the hoards of Edoras  of  better make than his short corslet forged  beneath
the Mountain  in the North.  But he  chose a  cap of iron  and leather  that
fitted well upon his  round head; and  a small  shield he also took. It bore
the  running  horse,  white upon green, that was the emblem of  the House of
Eorl.
'May it keep you well!' said Thjoden.  'It was made for me in Thengel's
day, while still I was a boy.'
Gimli bowed.  'I am proud, Lord  of the Mark, to bear your  device,' he
said. 'Indeed  sooner would I bear a  horse than be borne by one. I  love my
feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.'
'It may well be so,' said Thjoden.
The king now rose, and at once Jowyn came forward bearing wine. '                     Ferthu
Thjoden hbl!     ' she  said. 'Receive  now this  cup  and drink  in happy  hour.
Health be with thee at thy going and coming!'
Thjoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As
she stood before  Aragorn she paused suddenly and  looked  upon him, and her
eyes were shining. And he  looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as
he took the cup, his hand  met hers,  and he knew  that she trembled at  the
touch. 'Hail  Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of  Rohan!'  he
answered, but his face now was troubled and he did not smile.
When  they had  all drunk, the king went  down  the hall to  the doors.
There  the  guards awaited him, and  heralds  stood, and all  the  lords and
chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby.
'Behold! I  go forth, and  it  seems like to be  my last riding,'  said
Thjoden. 'I have  no  child. Thjodred  my  son  is  slain.  I name Jomer  my
sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as
you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I  leave behind,
to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?'
No man spoke.
'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?'
'In the House of Eorl,' answered Hbma.
'But Jomer I cannot spare, nor  would he stay,'  said the king; 'and he
is the last of that House.'
'I  said not Jomer,'  answered Hbma. 'And he is not the  last. There is
Jowyn, daughter of Jomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All
love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.'
'It shall be so,' said Thjoden. 'Let the heralds  announce to  the folk
that the Lady Jowyn will lead them!'
Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and  Jowyn knelt before
him   and  received  from   him  a  sword  and  a  fair  corslet.  'Farewell
sister-daughter!' he said. 'Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall  return  to
the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend themselves,
and
if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.' 'Speak not so!' she
answered.  'A  year shall I endure  for every  day  that passes  until  your
return.' But as she spoke her eyes went to Aragorn who stood nearby.
'The king shall come again,' he said. 'Fear not! Not West but East does
our doom await us.'
The  king now went down  the stair  with Gandalf beside him. The others
followed. Aragorn looked back  as they  passed towards the gate. Alone Jowyn
stood before the  doors of the house at the stair's head; the  sword was set
upright before her, and her hands were laid upon the hilt. She was  clad now
in mail and shone like silver in the sun.
Gimli walked with Legolas. his axe on his  shoulder. 'Well, at last  we
set off!' he said. 'Men need many words before deeds. My  axe is restless in
my  hands.  Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell-handed when they
come  to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare  that suits me. How shall I
come to  the battle?  I  wish  I  could  walk and  not  bump like a sack  at
Gandalf's saddlebow.'
'A safer seat than many, I guess,' said Legolas. 'Yet doubtless Gandalf
will  gladly put you  down  on  your  feet  when  blows  begin; or Shadowfax
himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.'
'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the
scalps of Men,' said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe.
At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in
the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered. Their spears were like
a springing wood. Loudly and  joyously  they shouted as  Thjoden came forth.
Some  held in  readiness the  king's horse, Snowmane,  and  others  held the
horses of  Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Jomer
came up to him, leading his horse.
'Hail,  Gimli Gluin's  son!' he cried.  'I have  not had  time to learn
gentle speech under your  rod, as you promised. But  shall  we not put aside
our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.'
'I will forget my wrath for  a while, Jomer son of Jomund,' said Gimli;
'but if ever you chance to  see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes, then  you
shall  acknowledge her  the fairest of  ladies, or our friendship will end.'
'So be  it!' said Jomer.  'But  until that  time pardon me, and  in token of
pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the
Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.'
'I thank  you  indeed,' said Gimli  greatly  pleased. 'I will gladly go
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.'
'It shall he so,'  said Jomer. 'Legolas upon  my left, and Aragorn upon
my right, and none will dare to stand before us!'
'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf.
'Running  wild  over the grass,' they  answered.  'He  will let  no man
handle him. There he goes, away down by the  ford, like a  shadow among  the
willows.'
Gandalf  whistled  and called aloud the horse's  name,  and far away he
tossed  his head and neighed,  and  turning sped  towards the host  like  an
arrow.
'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would
it appear,' said Jomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the
wizard.
'The gift seems already to be  given,'  said Thjoden. 'But hearken all!
Here  now I name my  guest, Gandalf  Greyhame,  wisest of  counsellors; most
welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while
our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.'
'I thank you, Thjoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw  back
his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He  wore no
helm nor mail. His snowy hair  flew free in the wind, his  white robes shone
dazzling in the sun.
'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.
'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!'
The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed.  Spear  clashed on
