Some  held in  readiness the  king's horse, Snowmane,  and  others  held the
horses of  Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Jomer
came up to him, leading his horse.
'Hail,  Gimli Gluin's  son!' he cried.  'I have  not had  time to learn
gentle speech under your  rod, as you promised. But  shall  we not put aside
our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.'
'I will forget my wrath for  a while, Jomer son of Jomund,' said Gimli;
'but if ever you chance to  see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes, then  you
shall  acknowledge her  the fairest of  ladies, or our friendship will end.'
'So be  it!' said Jomer.  'But  until that  time pardon me, and  in token of
pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the
Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.'
'I thank  you  indeed,' said Gimli  greatly  pleased. 'I will gladly go
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.'
'It shall he so,'  said Jomer. 'Legolas upon  my left, and Aragorn upon
my right, and none will dare to stand before us!'
'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf.
'Running  wild  over the grass,' they  answered.  'He  will let  no man
handle him. There he goes, away down by the  ford, like a  shadow among  the
willows.'
Gandalf  whistled  and called aloud the horse's  name,  and far away he
tossed  his head and neighed,  and  turning sped  towards the host  like  an
arrow.
'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would
it appear,' said Jomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the
wizard.
'The gift seems already to be  given,'  said Thjoden. 'But hearken all!
Here  now I name my  guest, Gandalf  Greyhame,  wisest of  counsellors; most
welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while
our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.'
'I thank you, Thjoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw  back
his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He  wore no
helm nor mail. His snowy hair  flew free in the wind, his  white robes shone
dazzling in the sun.
'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.
'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!'
The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed.  Spear  clashed on
shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush like the sudden onset
of a great wind  the  last host of Rohan rode thundering into  the West. Far
over  the  plain Jowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she stood  still,
alone before the doors of the silent house.
Chapter 7. Helm's Deep
The sun was  already westering as they rode  from Edoras, and the light
of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden
haze. There was  a beaten way,  north-westward  along the foot-hills  of the
White Mountains,  and  this they  followed, up and  down in a green country,
crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the
Misty Mountains  loomed; ever darker  and taller they grew as the miles went
by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind.
The  host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode
with all the speed they  could, pausing seldom. Swift and  enduring were the
steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty  leagues  and more
it was,  as  a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of  the Isen, where they
hoped to find the king's men that held back the hosts of Saruman.
Night closed about them. At last they  halted  to make their camp. They
had ridden for some five hours and  were far out upon the western plain, yet
more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under
the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no
fires, for they  were  uncertain  of events; but they set a ring of  mounted
guards about them, and  scouts  rode out far ahead, passing like shadows  in
the folds  of  the land. The  slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At
dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again.
There were no clouds overhead yet,  but a  heaviness was in the air; it
was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was  hazy, and behind it,
following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a  great
storm moving out of the East. And  away in the North-west there seemed to be
another  darkness brooding about  the feet of the Misty Mountains,  a shadow
that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale.
Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Jomer.  'You have the
keen  eyes of  your fair  kindred, Legolas,' he said; 'and they  can tell  a
sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder
towards Isengard?'
'Many miles  lie between,' said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his
eyes with his long hand. 'I can see a darkness. There  are shapes moving  in
it,  great shapes  far away upon the bank of the river; but  what they are I
