Chapter 7. Helm's Deep
The sun was  already westering as they rode  from Edoras, and the light
of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden
haze. There was  a beaten way,  north-westward  along the foot-hills  of the
White Mountains,  and  this they  followed, up and  down in a green country,
crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the
Misty Mountains  loomed; ever darker  and taller they grew as the miles went
by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind.
The  host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode
with all the speed they  could, pausing seldom. Swift and  enduring were the
steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty  leagues  and more
it was,  as  a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of  the Isen, where they
hoped to find the king's men that held back the hosts of Saruman.
Night closed about them. At last they  halted  to make their camp. They
had ridden for some five hours and  were far out upon the western plain, yet
more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under
the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no
fires, for they  were  uncertain  of events; but they set a ring of  mounted
guards about them, and  scouts  rode out far ahead, passing like shadows  in
the folds  of  the land. The  slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At
dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again.
There were no clouds overhead yet,  but a  heaviness was in the air; it
was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was  hazy, and behind it,
following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a  great
storm moving out of the East. And  away in the North-west there seemed to be
another  darkness brooding about  the feet of the Misty Mountains,  a shadow
that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale.
Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Jomer.  'You have the
keen  eyes of  your fair  kindred, Legolas,' he said; 'and they  can tell  a
sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder
towards Isengard?'
'Many miles  lie between,' said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his
eyes with his long hand. 'I can see a darkness. There  are shapes moving  in
it,  great shapes  far away upon the bank of the river; but  what they are I
cannot tell. It  is  not  mist  or  cloud that defeats  my  eyes: there is a
veiling shadow that  some power lays upon  the  land, and  it marches slowly
down  stream.  It  is as  if the twilight under  endless trees were  flowing
downwards from the hills.'
'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be
a black night.'
As  the second day  of their riding drew on, the  heaviness in the  air
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them: a sombre
canopy with great billowing  edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went
down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of the Riders were tipped with
fire as  the  last shafts of light kindled the steep  faces  of the peaks of
Thrihyrne: now very near they stood  on the  northernmost arm of  the  White
Mountains, three jagged horns staring at  the  sunset. In the last red  glow
men in the vanguard saw a black speck, a horseman  riding back towards them.
They halted awaiting him.
He came, a  weary man  with dinted helm  and cloven shield.  Slowly  he
climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At  length he spoke.
'Is  Jomer  here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late,  and with  too
little strength. Things have gone evilly since Thjodred fell. We were driven
back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing.
Then at  night fresh  forces  came  over  the river  against  our camp.  All
Isengard  must  be  emptied;  and Saruman has  armed the  wild  hillmen  and
herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We
were overmastered. The  shield-wall was  broken. Erkenbrand of  Westfold has
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The
rest are scattered.
'Where is Jomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead.  He should  return to
Edoras  before  the wolves of Isengard come there.' Thjoden  had sat silent,
hidden from  the  man's sight behind his  guards; now  he  urged  his  horse
forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!'  he said. 'I am here. The last host
of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.'
The man's face lightened with joy and wonder.  He drew himself up. Then
he knelt,  offering his  notched sword to the king. 'Command  me, lord!'  he
cried. 'And pardon me! I thought--'
'You thought I remained  in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter
snow. So  it was  when you  rode  to war. But  a  west  wind has shaken  the
boughs,' said Thjoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help
of Erkenbrand!'
While Thjoden was speaking, Gandalf  rode a short way ahead, and he sat
there  alone, gazing north  to Isengard and west to  the setting sun. Now he
came back.
'Ride,  Thjoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of
Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax
must  bear me now on a swift errand.'  Turning to Aragorn and Jomer  and the
men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till
I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!'
He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow  from the bow the great
horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the
sunset, a wind over the  grass, a shadow that fled  and  passed  from sight.
Snowmane  snorted and reared,  eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the
wing could have overtaken him.
'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Hbma.
'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Hbma. 'Ever he goes
and comes unlooked-for:'
'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain  'Said the
other.
'True  enough,'  said Hbma; 'but for myself, I will  wait  until I  see
Gandalf again.'
'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other.
The host turned away now from  the  road to the  Fords of Isen and bent
their course southward. Night fell,  and still they rode on. The hills  drew
near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening
sky.  Still  some miles away, on  the far side of the Westfold  Vale,  lay a
green coomb, a great bay in  the mountains,  out of which  a gorge opened in
the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's  Deep, after a hero of old wars
who  had  made  his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound  inward
from  the  north  under the shadow  of the Thrihyrne, till the  crow-haunted
cliffs rose like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.
At Helm's Gate, before the  mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock
thrust outward by the northern cliff. There  upon its spur stood  high walls
of  ancient stone, and within them was a lofty  tower. Men said that  in the
far-off  days of  the glory  of  Gondor  the  sea-kings  had built here this
fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet
sounded  upon   the   tower  echoed  in  the  Deep  behind,  as   if  armies
