of Erkenbrand!'
While Thjoden was speaking, Gandalf  rode a short way ahead, and he sat
there  alone, gazing north  to Isengard and west to  the setting sun. Now he
came back.
'Ride,  Thjoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of
Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax
must  bear me now on a swift errand.'  Turning to Aragorn and Jomer  and the
men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till
I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!'
He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow  from the bow the great
horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the
sunset, a wind over the  grass, a shadow that fled  and  passed  from sight.
Snowmane  snorted and reared,  eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the
wing could have overtaken him.
'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Hbma.
'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Hbma. 'Ever he goes
and comes unlooked-for:'
'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain  'Said the
other.
'True  enough,'  said Hbma; 'but for myself, I will  wait  until I  see
Gandalf again.'
'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other.
The host turned away now from  the  road to the  Fords of Isen and bent
their course southward. Night fell,  and still they rode on. The hills  drew
near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening
sky.  Still  some miles away, on  the far side of the Westfold  Vale,  lay a
green coomb, a great bay in  the mountains,  out of which  a gorge opened in
the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's  Deep, after a hero of old wars
who  had  made  his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound  inward
from  the  north  under the shadow  of the Thrihyrne, till the  crow-haunted
cliffs rose like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.
At Helm's Gate, before the  mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock
thrust outward by the northern cliff. There  upon its spur stood  high walls
of  ancient stone, and within them was a lofty  tower. Men said that  in the
far-off  days of  the glory  of  Gondor  the  sea-kings  had built here this
fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet
sounded  upon   the   tower  echoed  in  the  Deep  behind,  as   if  armies
long-forgotten  were issuing to war from  caves beneath the  hills. A  wall,
too,  the men  of old  had made  from the  Hornburg to  the  southern cliff,
barring  the  entrance  to  the gorge.  Beneath  it by a  wide  culvert  the
Deeping-stream passed out.  About the  feet  of  the Hornrock it wound,  and
flowed  then in  a gully through the  midst of a wide  green  gore,  sloping
gently  down  from  Helm's Gate  to  Helm's Dike.  Thence it  fell into  the
Deeping-coomb and  out into  the Westfold  Vale.  There  in the  Hornburg at
Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master  of Westfold on the borders of the  Mark, now
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being  wise, he had repaired
the wall and made the fastness strong.
The Riders were still in the low valley before the  mouth of the Coomb,
when cries and  hornblasts were heard  from their scouts that went in front.
Out of the  darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported
that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley, and that a host of Orcs and wild
men were hurrying southward from the Fords of  Isen and seemed  to be
making
for Helm's Deep.
'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,' said
the scout. 'And we  have met scattered companies, going  this way  and that,
leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand  none seem to  know.  It is likely
that  he  will be  overtaken  ere he can  reach Helm's Gate, if  he  has not
already perished.'
'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Thjoden.
'Yes,  lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a  horse,  passing
hither and thither over the  plains like wind in  the grass. Some thought he
was Saruman. It  is said  that he went away ere  nightfall towards Isengard.
Some say also  that  Wormtongue was  seen  earlier,  going northward  with a
company of Orcs.'
'It  will  go ill  with Wormtongue,  if  Gandalf  comes  upon  him said
Thjoden.  'Nonetheless I miss now both my  counsellors, the old and the new.
But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to
Helm's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the
host that comes from the North?'
'It is very great,' said the scout. 'He  that flies counts every foeman
twice, yet I have spoken  to stouthearted  men, and I do not doubt that  the
main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here.'
'Then let us be swift,' said Jomer. 'Let us drive through such foes  as
are  already  between  us  and the  fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep
where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills.
'Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. 'Saruman  has long spied out
this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!'
Aragorn and Legolas went now with Jomer in the van. On through the dark
night they rode, ever  slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed
southward, higher and higher into the  dim folds about the  mountains' feet.
They  found  few of the  enemy before  them. Here and  there they came  upon
roving bands of Orcs; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them.
'It will not be long I fear,' said Jomer, 'ere the coming of the king's
host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain
he has sent forth.'
The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the
dark,  the  sound  of harsh  singing.  They  had  climbed far  up  into  the
Deeping-coomb  when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless
points
of fiery light upon the  black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or
winding  up from  the lowlands in  long flickering lines.  Here and  there a
larger blaze leapt up.
'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn.
'They bring fire,' said Thjoden,  'and they are  burning as  they come,
rick, cot, and tree. This was  a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for
my folk!'
'Would that day  was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm
out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.'
'We need not  fly much further,' said Jomer.  'Not  far ahead now  lies
Helm's  Dike,  an  ancient trench  and rampart scored across the  coomb, two
furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.'
'Nay, we are too  few to defend the Dike,' said Thjoden. 'It  is a mile
long or more, and the breach in it is wide.'
'At  the breach our  rearguard  must  stand,  if we  are pressed,' said
Jomer.
There was neither star  nor moon when the Riders came  to the breach in
the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran
down from  the  Hornburg. The  rampart loomed suddenly  before  them, a high
shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them.
'The Lord of the Mark rides  to Helm's Gate,' Jomer answered. 'I, Jomer
