are  already  between  us  and the  fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep
where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills.
'Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. 'Saruman  has long spied out
this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!'
Aragorn and Legolas went now with Jomer in the van. On through the dark
night they rode, ever  slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed
southward, higher and higher into the  dim folds about the  mountains' feet.
They  found  few of the  enemy before  them. Here and  there they came  upon
roving bands of Orcs; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them.
'It will not be long I fear,' said Jomer, 'ere the coming of the king's
host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain
he has sent forth.'
The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the
dark,  the  sound  of harsh  singing.  They  had  climbed far  up  into  the
Deeping-coomb  when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless
points
of fiery light upon the  black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or
winding  up from  the lowlands in  long flickering lines.  Here and  there a
larger blaze leapt up.
'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn.
'They bring fire,' said Thjoden,  'and they are  burning as  they come,
rick, cot, and tree. This was  a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for
my folk!'
'Would that day  was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm
out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.'
'We need not  fly much further,' said Jomer.  'Not  far ahead now  lies
Helm's  Dike,  an  ancient trench  and rampart scored across the  coomb, two
furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.'
'Nay, we are too  few to defend the Dike,' said Thjoden. 'It  is a mile
long or more, and the breach in it is wide.'
'At  the breach our  rearguard  must  stand,  if we  are pressed,' said
Jomer.
There was neither star  nor moon when the Riders came  to the breach in
the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran
down from  the  Hornburg. The  rampart loomed suddenly  before  them, a high
shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them.
'The Lord of the Mark rides  to Helm's Gate,' Jomer answered. 'I, Jomer
son of Jomund, speak.'
'This  is good  tidings beyond hope,' said  the  sentinel. 'Hasten! The
enemy is on your heels.'
The host  passed  through the breach  and halted  on the sloping  sward
above. They now learned to their joy  that Erkenbrand  had left  many men to
hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither.
'Maybe, we have a thousand fit  to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old
man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But  most of them have seen
too many winters, as I have,  or too few, as my son's son here. What news of
Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all  that
is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.'
'I fear that he will not come now,' said Jomer. 'Our scouts have gained
no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.'
'I would that he had  escaped,'  said Thjoden. 'He was a mighty man. In
him lived again the  valour of Helm the Hammerhand.  But we cannot await
him
here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored?
We bring  little  provision,  for we  rode forth  to open  battle,  not to a
siege.'
'Behind us  in the caves  of the Deep are  three  parts of the folk  of
Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store
of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.'
'That is well,' said Jomer. 'They are burning or despoiling all that is
left in the vale.'
'If they come to  bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a
high price,' said Gamling.
The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the
stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and
passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with
joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg
and
the barrier wall.
Quickly  Jomer set his  men in readiness. The king and  the men of  his
household  were  in  the   Hornburg,  and  there  also  were   many  of  the
Westfold-men.  But on  the Deeping  Wall and its tower, and behind it, Jomer
arrayed most of  the strength that he had, for here the  defence seemed more
doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were
led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared.
The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could
walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet  over  which  only a tall
man could look. Here and there were clefts  in the  stone  through which men
could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a
door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led  also up
on to the wall  from the Deep  behind; but in front  it  was smooth, and the
great stones of it were set with such  skill that no foothold could be found
at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff.
Gimli  stood  leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat
above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom.
'This  is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping  on  the stones.
'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here.
This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came  up from the
dike. Give  me  a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place
that armies would break upon like water.'
'I do not doubt  it,'  said Legolas.  'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves
are strange folk. I do not like this  place, and I shall like it no more  by
the light of  day.  But you  comfort me, Gimli, and I  am  glad  to have you
standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more
of your kin among us. But even more would I give  for a hundred good archers
of Mirkwood. We shall need  them.  The Rohirrim have good bowmen after
their
fashion, but there are too few here, too few.'
'It is dark for archery,'  said  Gimli. 'Indeed it is  time  for sleep.
Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never  I thought any dwarf could. Riding is
tiring  work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give  me a row of orc-necks
and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!'
A  slow time  passed.  Far down  in  the valley  scattered  fires still
burned. The hosts of Isengard were  advancing in  silence now. Their torches
could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.
Suddenly from the Dike yells  and screams,  and the fierce battle-cries
of  men  broke  out. Flaming  brands  appeared over  the brink and clustered
thickly at the  breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping
back  over the  field and  up the ramp to  the  gate of  the  Hornburg.  The
rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in.
'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow  that we had,
