led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared.
The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could
walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet  over  which  only a tall
man could look. Here and there were clefts  in the  stone  through which men
could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a
door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led  also up
on to the wall  from the Deep  behind; but in front  it  was smooth, and the
great stones of it were set with such  skill that no foothold could be found
at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff.
Gimli  stood  leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat
above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom.
'This  is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping  on  the stones.
'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here.
This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came  up from the
dike. Give  me  a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place
that armies would break upon like water.'
'I do not doubt  it,'  said Legolas.  'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves
are strange folk. I do not like this  place, and I shall like it no more  by
the light of  day.  But you  comfort me, Gimli, and I  am  glad  to have you
standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more
of your kin among us. But even more would I give  for a hundred good archers
of Mirkwood. We shall need  them.  The Rohirrim have good bowmen after
their
fashion, but there are too few here, too few.'
'It is dark for archery,'  said  Gimli. 'Indeed it is  time  for sleep.
Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never  I thought any dwarf could. Riding is
tiring  work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give  me a row of orc-necks
and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!'
A  slow time  passed.  Far down  in  the valley  scattered  fires still
burned. The hosts of Isengard were  advancing in  silence now. Their torches
could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.
Suddenly from the Dike yells  and screams,  and the fierce battle-cries
of  men  broke  out. Flaming  brands  appeared over  the brink and clustered
thickly at the  breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping
back  over the  field and  up the ramp to  the  gate of  the  Hornburg.  The
rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in.
'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow  that we had,
and  filled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long. Already they
are  scaling the bank at many  points,  thick as marching ants. But we  have
taught them not to carry torches.'
It was  now past  midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness
of the  heavy  air foreboded storm.  Suddenly  the  clouds were  seared by a
blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a
staring moment the watchers  on the walls saw all the space between them and
the  Dike lit with white  light: it  was  boiling  and  crawling  with black
shapes. some squat and broad, some  tall and grim, with high helms and sable
shields. Hundreds and hundreds more  were pouring over the Dike and  through
the breach.  The dark tide flowed  up to  the  walls  from  cliff  to cliff.
Thunder rolled in the valley. Rain came lashing down.
Arrows thick  as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell
clinking  and glancing on the stones. Some  found  a  mark.  The  assault on
Helm's Deep  had  begun, but  no  sound  or challenge  was heard within;  no
answering arrows came.
The  assailing  hosts halted, foiled  by the silent menace  of rock and
wall. Ever and again  the lightning  tore aside the darkness.  Then the Orcs
screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that
stood  revealed upon the battlements;  and the men of the Mark amazed looked
out,  as it seemed  to them, upon a great field of  dark corn, tossed  by  a
tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light.
Brazen trumpets sounded.  The enemy surged  forward,  some against  the
Deeping Wall,  other  towards the causeway and  the ramp that led up to  the
Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were mustered, and the wild men of the
Dunland fells. A moment they hesitated and then  on they came. The lightning
flashed,  and blazoned  upon  every helm  and  shield  the  ghastly  hand of
Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the  rock;  they drove towards
the gates.
Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them,  and a hail of
stones. They  wavered, broke, and fled  back; and  then charged again, broke
and charged  again; and each time, like  the incoming sea, they  halted at a
higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring  men leaped forth.
They held their great shields  above them like a roof, while in  their midst
they  bore two trunks of  mighty  trees.  Behind  them orc-archers  crowded,
sending a hail  of  darts against the bowmen on the walls. They  gained  the
gates. The  trees, swung by  strong  arms, smote the timbers  with a rending
boom. If any man fell,  crushed by a stone hurtling  from above,  two others
sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed.
Jomer and Aragorn stood  together on  the Deeping Wall. They heard  the
roar  of voices and the thudding of  the rams; and then in a sudden flash of
light they beheld the peril of the gates.
'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!'
Running  like fire, they  sped along  the  wall, and up the  steps, and
passed  into the  outer  court  upon the Rock.  As they  ran they gathered a
handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an
angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff  stretched  out to  meet
it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the
wall and the  sheer brink of  the Rock.  Together Jomer  and Aragorn  sprang
through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath
as one.
'G®thwinl!' cried Jomer. 'G®thwinl for the Mark!'
'And®ril!' cried Aragorn. 'And®ril for the D®nedain!'
Charging  from  the side,  they  hurled themselves  upon the  wild men.
And®ril rose and fell,  gleaming with white fire. A shout went  up from wall
and tower: 'And®ril! And®ril goes to  war. The Blade that  was Broken shines
again!'
Dismayed  the  rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight;  but the
wall of their shields  was broken as by  a  lightning-stroke, and  they were
swept  away, hewn down,  or cast over the Rock into the stony stream  below.
The orc-archers shot wildly and then fled.
For a moment Jomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was
rumbling in  the distance now.  The lightning flickered still, far off among
the mountains  in the  South. A keen wind was blowing from  the North again.
The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills
of  the  Coomb-side  the  westering  moon  rode,  glimmering yellow  in  the
storm-wrack.
'We  did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking  at the gates. Their
great  hinges and  iron bars were  wrenched and bent; many  of their timbers
were cracked.
'Yet we cannot stay here beyond  the walls to defend them,' said Jomer.
'Look!'  He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Orcs  and  Men
were  gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and  skipped on  the
stones about  them. 'Come! We must get  back and see what we  can do to pile
