boom. If any man fell,  crushed by a stone hurtling  from above,  two others
sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed.
Jomer and Aragorn stood  together on  the Deeping Wall. They heard  the
roar  of voices and the thudding of  the rams; and then in a sudden flash of
light they beheld the peril of the gates.
'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!'
Running  like fire, they  sped along  the  wall, and up the  steps, and
passed  into the  outer  court  upon the Rock.  As they  ran they gathered a
handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an
angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff  stretched  out to  meet
it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the
wall and the  sheer brink of  the Rock.  Together Jomer  and Aragorn  sprang
through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath
as one.
'G®thwinl!' cried Jomer. 'G®thwinl for the Mark!'
'And®ril!' cried Aragorn. 'And®ril for the D®nedain!'
Charging  from  the side,  they  hurled themselves  upon the  wild men.
And®ril rose and fell,  gleaming with white fire. A shout went  up from wall
and tower: 'And®ril! And®ril goes to  war. The Blade that  was Broken shines
again!'
Dismayed  the  rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight;  but the
wall of their shields  was broken as by  a  lightning-stroke, and  they were
swept  away, hewn down,  or cast over the Rock into the stony stream  below.
The orc-archers shot wildly and then fled.
For a moment Jomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was
rumbling in  the distance now.  The lightning flickered still, far off among
the mountains  in the  South. A keen wind was blowing from  the North again.
The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills
of  the  Coomb-side  the  westering  moon  rode,  glimmering yellow  in  the
storm-wrack.
'We  did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking  at the gates. Their
great  hinges and  iron bars were  wrenched and bent; many  of their timbers
were cracked.
'Yet we cannot stay here beyond  the walls to defend them,' said Jomer.
'Look!'  He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Orcs  and  Men
were  gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and  skipped on  the
stones about  them. 'Come! We must get  back and see what we  can do to pile
stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!'
They  turned  and ran. At  that  moment some dozen Orcs that  had  lain
motionless among  the slain  leaped  to their feet,  and  came  silently and
swiftly behind. Two flung themselves to the ground at Jomer's heels, tripped
him,  and in a moment they were on top of him. But a  small dark figure that
none had observed sprang out of the shadows  and gave a hoarse  shout:                       Baruk
Khazvd! Khazvd ai-mknu!            An axe swung and swept back. Two Orcs fell
headless.
The rest fled.
Jomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid.
The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside
with  stones. When all  were safe  within, Jomer turned: 'I thank you, Gimli
son of Gluin!' he said. 'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie.
But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?'
'I followed you to shake off sleep,'  said Gimli; 'but I looked on  the
hillmen  and they seemed over large for me, so  I sat  beside a stone to see
your sword-play.'
'I shall not find it easy to repay you,' said Jomer.
'There may be many a chance ere the night is over,' laughed the  Dwarf.
'But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.'
'Two!' said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the
wall.
'Two?' said Legolas. 'I have done  better, though  now I must grope for
spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But
that is only a few leaves in a forest.'
The  sky  now  was  quickly clearing and the sinking  moon was  shining
brightly. But the light brought little hope to  the Riders  of the Mark. The
enemy before them seemed to  have  grown rather than diminished,  still more
were  pressing up from  the valley through  the breach. The sortie  upon the
Rock gained  only a  brief respite. The  assault on the gates was redoubled.
Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a  sea.  Orcs and
hillmen swarmed about  its feet from end  to end. Ropes with grappling hooks
were hurled over the  parapet faster  than men could cut them  or fling them
back.  Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin,
but many more replaced  them, and Orcs sprang up them like  apes in the dark
forests of the South. Before the wall's foot  the dead and broken were piled
like shingle in  a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the
enemy came on.
The men of Rohan grew weary.  All their arrows  were  spent, and  every
shaft  was shot;  their swords were notched, and their shields  were  riven.
Three  times Aragorn and Jomer  rallied them, and three times And®ril flamed
in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall.
Then  a  clamour arose  in the Deep  behind. Orcs had crept  like  rats
through the culvert  through  which the stream  flowed out. There  they  had
gathered in the  shadow of the cliffs, until  the assault  above was hottest
and  nearly all  the men of the defence had rushed to  the  wall's top. Then
they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of  the Deep and were
among the horses, fighting with the guards.
Down from  the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce  cry  that echoed in  the
cliffs. 'Khazvd! Khazvd!' He soon had work enough.
'Ai-oi!'  he  shouted.  'The  Orcs are  behind  the  wall. Ai-oi! Come,
Legolas! There are enough for us both.             Khazvd ai-mknu!       '
Gamling the Old looked down  from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice
of the  dwarf above all the  tumult.  'The Orcs are in  the Deep!' he cried.
'Helm! Helm!  Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped  down the  stair from
the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back.
Their  onset was fierce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before  them.
Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain
or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the  guardians
of the hidden caves.
'Twenty-one!'  cried  Gimli. He  hewed a two-handed stroke and laid the
last Orc before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.'
'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling.  'Dwarves  are  said  to be
cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!'
'We do  not shape stone with battle-axes,  nor with our  finger-nails,'
said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.'
They  gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find
to hand, and under  Gimli's direction  the Westfold-men blocked up the inner
end  of  the  culvert,  until  only  a  narrow  outlet  remained.  Then  the
Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path,
and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff.
'It will  be drier above,' said  Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see  how
things go on the wall!'
He  climbed up and  found Legolas beside Aragorn and Jomer. The elf was
