enemy came on.
The men of Rohan grew weary.  All their arrows  were  spent, and  every
shaft  was shot;  their swords were notched, and their shields  were  riven.
Three  times Aragorn and Jomer  rallied them, and three times And®ril flamed
in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall.
Then  a  clamour arose  in the Deep  behind. Orcs had crept  like  rats
through the culvert  through  which the stream  flowed out. There  they  had
gathered in the  shadow of the cliffs, until  the assault  above was hottest
and  nearly all  the men of the defence had rushed to  the  wall's top. Then
they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of  the Deep and were
among the horses, fighting with the guards.
Down from  the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce  cry  that echoed in  the
cliffs. 'Khazvd! Khazvd!' He soon had work enough.
'Ai-oi!'  he  shouted.  'The  Orcs are  behind  the  wall. Ai-oi! Come,
Legolas! There are enough for us both.             Khazvd ai-mknu!       '
Gamling the Old looked down  from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice
of the  dwarf above all the  tumult.  'The Orcs are in  the Deep!' he cried.
'Helm! Helm!  Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped  down the  stair from
the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back.
Their  onset was fierce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before  them.
Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain
or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the  guardians
of the hidden caves.
'Twenty-one!'  cried  Gimli. He  hewed a two-handed stroke and laid the
last Orc before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.'
'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling.  'Dwarves  are  said  to be
cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!'
'We do  not shape stone with battle-axes,  nor with our  finger-nails,'
said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.'
They  gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find
to hand, and under  Gimli's direction  the Westfold-men blocked up the inner
end  of  the  culvert,  until  only  a  narrow  outlet  remained.  Then  the
Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path,
and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff.
'It will  be drier above,' said  Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see  how
things go on the wall!'
He  climbed up and  found Legolas beside Aragorn and Jomer. The elf was
whetting his long knife. There was  for a while a lull in the assault, since
the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled.
'Twenty-one!' said Gimli.
'Good!' said  Legolas.  'But my count  is  now  two  dozen. It has been
knife-work up here.'
Jomer  and Aragorn  leant wearily on their swords. Away on the left the
crash  and  clamour  of the battle  on the Rock rose  loud  again.  But  the
Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea.  Its gates lay in ruin;
but over  the  barricade of  beams and  stones  within no  enemy  as yet had
passed.
Aragorn  looked at the pale stars, and  at the moon, now sloping behind
the  western  hills that enclosed  the valley. 'This is a  night  as long as
years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?'
'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him.
'But dawn will not help us, I fear.'
'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn.
'But these creatures of  Isengard, these half-orcs and  goblin-men that
the foul craft of Saruman  has bred, they will not quail at the  sun,'  said
Gamling. 'And neither will  the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their
voices?'
'I  hear them,' said  Jomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and
the bellowing of beasts to my ears.'
'Yet  there  are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I
know that tongue.  It is an ancient speech  of men, and  once  was spoken in
many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for
our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take
their king.  Death to the Forgoil!  Death  to the Strawheads! Death  to  the
robbers of the North!'  Such names they have for  us. Not in half a thousand
years have they forgotten their  grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the
Mark to Eorl the  Young and  made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman
has  inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They  will not give way now
for dusk or dawn, until Thjoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.'
'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn.  'Is it not said
that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?'
'So the minstrels say,' said Jomer.
'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn.
Even as they  spoke there came a blare  of trumpets. Then there  was  a
crash  and a flash of  flame and  smoke. The waters  of  the  Deeping-stream
poured out  hissing and  foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping  hole
was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in.
'Devilry of Saruman!' cried  Aragorn.  'They have crept  in the culvert
again, while  we talked, and  they have  lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our
feet.  Elendil, Elendil!    ' he shouted, as he leaped down into  the breach; but
even as he  did  so  a hundred ladders were raised against the  battlements.
Over the wall and under  the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark
wave upon a hill of  sand. The  defence  was  swept away. Some of the Riders
were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting as
they gave way, step  by step, towards the caves.  Others cut  their way back
towards the citadel.
A  broad  stairway,  climbed  from  the Deep  up  to the  Rock and  the
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood  Aragorn. In his hand still
And®ril gleamed,  and  the terror of  the sword  for a while  held  back the
enemy,  as one by one all who  could  gain the  stair passed up  towards the
gate. Behind  on the upper  steps knelt Legolas. His bow  was  bent, but one
gleaned arrow  was all that he had left,  and he  peered out now,  ready  to
shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair.
'All  who  can  have now got safe  within, Aragorn,' he  called.  'Come
back!'
Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as  he ran he stumbled in his
weariness. At once  his  enemies  leapt forward. Up  came the Orcs, yelling,
with  their  long arms stretched out to  seize  him. The foremost  fell with
Legolas' last  arrow in his  throat. but the rest sprang  over  him.  Then a
great boulder, cast from the outer wall above,  crashed down upon the stair,
and hurled them back into the Deep.  Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it
clanged to behind him.
'Things go ill,  my friends,'  he said, wiping the sweat  from his brow
with his arm.
'Ill enough,' said Legolas,  'but not yet hopeless, while  we have  you
with us. Where is Gimli?'
'I do not  know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw  him fighting on the ground
behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.'
'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas.
'He is  stout and strong,'  said Aragorn. 'Let  us  hope  that he  will
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we.
