crash  and a flash of  flame and  smoke. The waters  of  the  Deeping-stream
poured out  hissing and  foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping  hole
was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in.
'Devilry of Saruman!' cried  Aragorn.  'They have crept  in the culvert
again, while  we talked, and  they have  lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our
feet.  Elendil, Elendil!    ' he shouted, as he leaped down into  the breach; but
even as he  did  so  a hundred ladders were raised against the  battlements.
Over the wall and under  the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark
wave upon a hill of  sand. The  defence  was  swept away. Some of the Riders
were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting as
they gave way, step  by step, towards the caves.  Others cut  their way back
towards the citadel.
A  broad  stairway,  climbed  from  the Deep  up  to the  Rock and  the
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood  Aragorn. In his hand still
And®ril gleamed,  and  the terror of  the sword  for a while  held  back the
enemy,  as one by one all who  could  gain the  stair passed up  towards the
gate. Behind  on the upper  steps knelt Legolas. His bow  was  bent, but one
gleaned arrow  was all that he had left,  and he  peered out now,  ready  to
shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair.
'All  who  can  have now got safe  within, Aragorn,' he  called.  'Come
back!'
Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as  he ran he stumbled in his
weariness. At once  his  enemies  leapt forward. Up  came the Orcs, yelling,
with  their  long arms stretched out to  seize  him. The foremost  fell with
Legolas' last  arrow in his  throat. but the rest sprang  over  him.  Then a
great boulder, cast from the outer wall above,  crashed down upon the stair,
and hurled them back into the Deep.  Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it
clanged to behind him.
'Things go ill,  my friends,'  he said, wiping the sweat  from his brow
with his arm.
'Ill enough,' said Legolas,  'but not yet hopeless, while  we have  you
with us. Where is Gimli?'
'I do not  know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw  him fighting on the ground
behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.'
'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas.
'He is  stout and strong,'  said Aragorn. 'Let  us  hope  that he  will
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we.
Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.'
'That must be my hope'' said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this
way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.'
'If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your  count again,' laughed
Aragorn. 'Never did I see an axe so wielded.'
'I must go  and seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night
would end, and I could have better light for shooting.'
Aragorn  now  passed into the  citadel. There to his  dismay he learned
that Jomer had not reached the Hornburg.
'Nay,  he did not come to the Rock,'  said one  of the Westfold-men, 'I
last saw him gathering men about him and fighting  in the mouth of the Deep.
Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.'
Aragorn strode  on  through  the  inner court,  and  mounted to a  high
chamber in  the tower. There stood  the king, dark  against a narrow window,
looking out upon the vale.
'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said.
'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and  all the  defence swept away; but
many have escaped hither to the Rock.'
'Is Jomer here?'
'No, lord. But many  of your men  retreated into the Deep; and some say
that Jomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy
and
come within the caves. What hope they may have then I do not know.'
'More than we.  Good  provision,  it is said. And  the air is wholesome
there because of  the outlets through fissures  in the rock  far above. None
can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.'
'But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They
have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they cannot come in
the caves, they may seal up those that are inside.  But now we must turn all
our thoughts to our own defence.'
'I fret in this prison,'  said Thjoden. 'If I could have set a spear in
rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the
joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.'
'Here at least you are guarded in the  strongest fastness of the Mark,'
said Aragorn.  'More  hope we  have to defend you  in  the Hornburg than  in
Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.'
'It  is said  that the Hornburg  has  never  fallen  to  assault,' said
Thjoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once
was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers
and
such reckless  hate? Had I known that the strength  of Isengard was grown so
great, maybe  l should  not so rashly have ridden forth to  meet it, for all
the arts of Gandalf. His counsel  seems  not now so good as it did under the
morning sun.'
'Do not judge  the counsel  of  Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said
Aragorn.
'The  end will not be  long,'  said the king. 'But I will not end here,
taken like an old badger  in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel  and the horses of
my guard are  in the inner court.  When  dawn comes, I  will bid  men  sound
Helm's horn,  and I  will ride forth.  Will  you ride  with me then, son  of
Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth
a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.'
'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn.
Taking  his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their
circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot.
Legolas  went with  him.  Blasts of  fire leaped up from  below  shaking the
stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the
Orcs gained the  summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them
down.
At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless  of the darts  of
the  enemy. As  he  looked forth he  saw the eastern sky grow  pale. Then he
raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.
The Orcs yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you
wish  to speak  to us, come down! Bring out your  king!  We are the fighting
Uruk-hai.  We will fetch him from his hole,  if  he does not come. Bring out
your skulking king!'
'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn.
'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do
you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.'
'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn.
'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai:  we  do not stop
the fight for night or day, for fair  weather or for storm. We come to kill,
by sun or moon. What of the dawn?'
'None knows what the  new day shall bring him,' said  Aragorn. 'Get you
