Thjoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once
was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers
and
such reckless  hate? Had I known that the strength  of Isengard was grown so
great, maybe  l should  not so rashly have ridden forth to  meet it, for all
the arts of Gandalf. His counsel  seems  not now so good as it did under the
morning sun.'
'Do not judge  the counsel  of  Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said
Aragorn.
'The  end will not be  long,'  said the king. 'But I will not end here,
taken like an old badger  in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel  and the horses of
my guard are  in the inner court.  When  dawn comes, I  will bid  men  sound
Helm's horn,  and I  will ride forth.  Will  you ride  with me then, son  of
Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth
a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.'
'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn.
Taking  his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their
circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot.
Legolas  went with  him.  Blasts of  fire leaped up from  below  shaking the
stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the
Orcs gained the  summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them
down.
At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless  of the darts  of
the  enemy. As  he  looked forth he  saw the eastern sky grow  pale. Then he
raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.
The Orcs yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you
wish  to speak  to us, come down! Bring out your  king!  We are the fighting
Uruk-hai.  We will fetch him from his hole,  if  he does not come. Bring out
your skulking king!'
'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn.
'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do
you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.'
'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn.
'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai:  we  do not stop
the fight for night or day, for fair  weather or for storm. We come to kill,
by sun or moon. What of the dawn?'
'None knows what the  new day shall bring him,' said  Aragorn. 'Get you
gone, ere it turn to your evil.'
'Get down or  we will shoot you from the wall,' they cried. 'This is no
parley. You have nothing to say.'
'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No  enemy has  yet taken
the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left
alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.'
So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there
alone  above the ruined gates before  the host of his  enemies, that many of
the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and
some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs laughed with loud voices;
and a  hail of darts and arrows whistled over  the  wall, as  Aragorn leaped
down.
There  was a roar and a blast of  fire. The archway  of the gate  above
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed  in smoke  and
dust.
The  barricade was  scattered as if  by  a thunderbolt. Aragorn  ran to  the
king's tower.
But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs  about it yelled,  preparing to
charge, a murmur arose behind them. like a wind in the distance, and it grew
to a clamour of many voices crying strange news  in the dawn.  The Orcs upon
the Rock, hearing the  rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back.  And then,
sudden and terrible, from the  tower above, the sound  of the great horn  of
Helm rang out.
All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast themselves on
their faces and covered their ears  with their claws. Back from the Deep the
echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald
stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes
did not die. Ever the  horn-blasts wound on among the hills; nearer now  and
louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free.
'Helm!  Helm!' the Riders  shouted.  'Helm is arisen  and comes back to
war. Helm for Thjoden King!'
And with that shout the king came. His horse  was white as snow, golden
was  his shield,  and his  spear was long. At his  right  hand  was Aragorn,
Elendil's  heir, behind him rode the lords of the  House of Eorl the  Young.
Light sprang in the sky. Night departed.
'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from
the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they drove  through
the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them  from the Deep came
the stern cries of' men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out
poured  all the men that were left upon  the Rock.  And  ever the  sound  of
blowing horns echoed in the hills.
On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains  and champions fell
or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Their backs were to
the swords  and  spears of the Riders and their  faces to  the  valley. They
cried  and  wailed,  for fear and great wonder had  come upon  them with the
rising of the day.
So King Thjoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to  the  great
Dike. There the company  halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the
sun flared above the  eastern hills and  glimmered on their spears. But they
sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb.
The land had changed. Where before the green dale had  lain, its grassy
slopes lapping  the ever-mounting hills,  there  now a forest  loomed. Great
trees, bare and  silent,  stood, rank on  rank, with tangled bough and hoary
head;  their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was
under them. Between the  Dike and the eaves of that  nameless wood only  two
open furlongs lay.  There now cowered  the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror
of the  king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate
until all above the Dike was  empty  of them, but below it they were  packed
like swarming flies.  Vainly they crawled and clambered about  the walls  of
the coomb. seeking to escape.  Upon the  east  too sheer and stony  was  the
valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached.
There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in
the rising  sun.  Over  the low hills  the horns were  sounding. Behind him,
hastening down the long slopes,  were a  thousand  men on foot; their swords
were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong.  His shield was
red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn
and blew a ringing blast.
'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!'
'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!'
'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come!
I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.'
The  hosts  of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from
fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach
of  the  Dike  charged  the  king's  company.  Down  from  the hills  leaped
