hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a
rustle in the grasses.
At the bottom of the  Hill  on its western  side they came  to the gate
opening on to a  narrow lane.  There they  halted and adjusted the straps of
their packs. Presently  Sam  appeared, trotting quickly and  breathing hard;
his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head
a tall shapeless fell  bag, which  he called  a hat. In the gloom  he looked
very much like a dwarf.
'I am sure you  have given me all the heaviest stuff,'  said Frodo.  'I
pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.'
'I could take a lot  more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,' said Sam
stoutly and untruthfully.
'No, you  don't,  Sam!' said  Pippin.  'It is  good  for him. He's  got
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own.'
'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as a
willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense.
I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it
at our next  packing.'  He  picked  up his  stick  again. 'Well, we all like
walking  in the dark,' he said,  'so let's put  some miles  behind us before
bed.'
For a short way they followed  the lane westwards. Then leaving it they
turned left and took quietly to  the  fields again. They went in single file
along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them.
In their  dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings.
Since they were  all hobbits, and were  trying  to be silent,  they made  no
noise that even hobbits would  hear. Even the wild things in  the fields and
woods hardly noticed their passing.
After  some  time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow
plank-bridge.  The stream  was  there no more than  a winding  black ribbon,
bordered with leaning  alder-trees. A mile or two further south they hastily
crossed the great  road  from  the Brandywine Bridge; they were  now in  the
Tookland and  bending south-eastwards they made for the  Green Hill Country.
As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and  saw the  lamps
in Hobbiton far off twinkling in  the gentle  valley of  the  Water. Soon it
disappeared  in the  folds of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater
beside  its grey pool. When the  light of  the  last  farm was  far  behind,
peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell.
'I wonder if  I shall ever  look down into that valley  again,' he said
quietly.
When they  had walked for about three hours they rested. The night  was
clear,  cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up  the
hill-sides from the streams and deep  meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in
a light wind  above their heads, made a black net against the pale sky. They
ate a  very  frugal supper (for hobbits), and  then went on again. Soon they
struck a narrow road, that  went rolling  up and down,  fading grey into the
darkness ahead: the road to Woodhall, and  Stock, and the Bucklebury  Ferry.
It climbed away from the  main road  in the Water-valley, and wound over the
skirts  of  the  Green  Hills  towards  Woody-End,  a  wild  corner  of  the
Eastfarthing.
After a while  they plunged into  a deeply  cloven  track  between tall
trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first
they  talked,  or hummed a  tune  softly together, being  now far  away from
inquisitive ears. Then they marched  on in silence,  and Pippin began to lag
behind.  At  last, as  they began to  climb  a  steep slope, he  stopped and
yawned.
'I  am  so sleepy,' he said,  'that soon I shall fall down on the road.
Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.'
'I thought you liked walking in the dark,' said Frodo. 'But there is no
great  hurry.  Merry expects  us some time the day after  tomorrow; but that
leaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot.'
'The  wind's in  the West,' said Sam. 'If  we get to the other  side of
this hill,  we shall find a spot  that  is  sheltered and snug  enough, sir.
There is  a dry fir-wood just ahead,  if  I  remember rightly.' Sam knew the
land well  within twenty miles of  Hobbiton, but that was  the  limit of his
geography.
Just  over the  top  of  the  hill they came on  the patch of fir-wood.
Leaving  the  road  they  went into  the deep resin-scented  darkness of the
trees, and  gathered  dead  sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a
merry crackle of flame at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it
for  a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in an  angle  of the great
tree's roots, they curled  up  in  their cloaks and blankets, and were  soon
fast asleep. They set no  watch; even Frodo feared  no danger yet,  for they
were still in  the heart  of the Shire. A few  creatures came and  looked at
them when the fire had died away. A fox passing through the wood on business
of his own stopped several minutes and sniffed.
'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings
in this land,  but  I have  seldom  heard of a hobbit  sleeping out of doors
under a tree. Three of them! There's something mighty queer behind this.' He
was quite right, but he never found out any more about it.
The morning came,  pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that
a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff.
'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't  I drive?'  he thought, as he usually
did at the beginning of an expedition. 'And all  my  beautiful feather  beds
are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These  tree-roots would  do them good.'
He stretched. 'Wake up, hobbits!' he cried. It's a beautiful morning.'
'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering  over the edge of his
blanket with one eye. 'Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you
got the bath-water hot?'
Sam jumped up,  looking rather  bleary. 'No,  sir, I haven't, sir!'  he
said.
Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and  rolled him  over, and then
walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red out
of the mists that lay thick  on  the world. Touched  with  gold and red  the
autumn trees seemed to  be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared.
When  he returned  Sam  and  Pippin had got a good fire going. 'Water!'
shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?'
'I  don't keep  water in my  pockets,' said  Frodo. 'We thought you had
gone to find  some,' said Pippin, busy  setting out the food, and cups. 'You
had better go now.'
'You  can come too,'  said  Frodo, 'and  bring  all the water-bottles.'
There was  a stream at the foot of the hill. They  filled their  bottles and
the small  camping kettle at a little fall  where the water fell  a few feet
over an outcrop  of grey stone. It  was  icy cold;  and they spluttered  and
puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.
When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again, it
was after  ten o'clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. They
went  down the slope, and across the stream where  it  dived under the road,
and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by
that time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear already seemed
