the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them  from the Deep came
the stern cries of' men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out
poured  all the men that were left upon  the Rock.  And  ever the  sound  of
blowing horns echoed in the hills.
On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains  and champions fell
or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Their backs were to
the swords  and  spears of the Riders and their  faces to  the  valley. They
cried  and  wailed,  for fear and great wonder had  come upon  them with the
rising of the day.
So King Thjoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to  the  great
Dike. There the company  halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the
sun flared above the  eastern hills and  glimmered on their spears. But they
sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb.
The land had changed. Where before the green dale had  lain, its grassy
slopes lapping  the ever-mounting hills,  there  now a forest  loomed. Great
trees, bare and  silent,  stood, rank on  rank, with tangled bough and hoary
head;  their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was
under them. Between the  Dike and the eaves of that  nameless wood only  two
open furlongs lay.  There now cowered  the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror
of the  king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate
until all above the Dike was  empty  of them, but below it they were  packed
like swarming flies.  Vainly they crawled and clambered about  the walls  of
the coomb. seeking to escape.  Upon the  east  too sheer and stony  was  the
valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached.
There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in
the rising  sun.  Over  the low hills  the horns were  sounding. Behind him,
hastening down the long slopes,  were a  thousand  men on foot; their swords
were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong.  His shield was
red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn
and blew a ringing blast.
'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!'
'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!'
'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come!
I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.'
The  hosts  of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from
fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach
of  the  Dike  charged  the  king's  company.  Down  from  the hills  leaped
Erkenbrand, lord  of Westfold. Down leaped Shadowfax, like a  deer that runs
surefooted  in  the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror
of  his coming filled  the enemy with  madness. The  wild men fell on  their
faces before him. The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and
spear. Like  a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they
passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that shadow none ever
came again.
Chapter 8. The Road to Isengard
So it was that in the  light of a fair morning King Thjoden and Gandalf
the White Rider met again  upon the green  grass beside the  Deeping-stream.
There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas  the Elf, and Erkenbrand
of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden House. About them were gathered the
Rohirrim, the Riders of  the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and
their eyes were turned towards the wood.
Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who
had been driven back into the  Deep. There came  Gamling  the Old, and Jomer
son of Jomund, and  beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. He had  no helm,
and
about his head was a linen band stained  with blood; but his voice  was loud
and strong.
'Forty-two,  Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My  axe is  notched: the
forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?'
'You have passed my  score  by  one,' answered Legolas. 'But  I  do not
grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!'
'Welcome, Jomer, sister-son!' said Thjoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I
am glad indeed.'
'Hail, Lord  of the Mark!' said Jomer. 'The dark night has  passed  and
day has come again. But  the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and
gazed in wonder, first at the  wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come
in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said.
'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and  meet you
here.'
'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming.
Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!'
'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good
counsel in peril, and made  use of the  speed of Shadowfax. Your  own valour
has done more, and  the stout legs of the Westfold-men  marching through the
night.'
Then they all gazed  at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced
darkly  at the wood,  and  passed their  hands  over their brows, as if they
thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.
