Chapter 8. The Road to Isengard
So it was that in the  light of a fair morning King Thjoden and Gandalf
the White Rider met again  upon the green  grass beside the  Deeping-stream.
There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas  the Elf, and Erkenbrand
of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden House. About them were gathered the
Rohirrim, the Riders of  the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and
their eyes were turned towards the wood.
Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who
had been driven back into the  Deep. There came  Gamling  the Old, and Jomer
son of Jomund, and  beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. He had  no helm,
and
about his head was a linen band stained  with blood; but his voice  was loud
and strong.
'Forty-two,  Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My  axe is  notched: the
forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?'
'You have passed my  score  by  one,' answered Legolas. 'But  I  do not
grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!'
'Welcome, Jomer, sister-son!' said Thjoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I
am glad indeed.'
'Hail, Lord  of the Mark!' said Jomer. 'The dark night has  passed  and
day has come again. But  the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and
gazed in wonder, first at the  wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come
in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said.
'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and  meet you
here.'
'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming.
Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!'
'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good
counsel in peril, and made  use of the  speed of Shadowfax. Your  own valour
has done more, and  the stout legs of the Westfold-men  marching through the
night.'
Then they all gazed  at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced
darkly  at the wood,  and  passed their  hands  over their brows, as if they
thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.
Gandalf laughed long and merrily. 'The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the
wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond
the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope
the event has proved.'
'Then  if  not  yours,  whose  is  the  wizardry?'  said Thjoden.  'Not
Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of  whom  we have yet
to learn?'
'It is  not  wizardry, but a power far older,' said  Gandalf:  'a power
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.
Ere iron was found or tree was hewn,
When young was mountain under moon;
Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,
It walked the forests long ago.'
'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Thjoden.
'If you  would  learn  that,  you  should come  with me  to  Isengard '
answered Gandalf.
'To Isengard?' they cried.
'Yes,'  said Gandalf. 'I shall  return to  Isengard, and those who will
may come with me. There we may see strange things.'
'But  there  are  not men  enough  in  the Mark,  not if  they were all
gathered  together and  healed  of  wounds  and  weariness, to  assault  the
stronghold of Saruman,' said Thjoden.
'Nevertheless  to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the
moon!'
'Nay!' said Thjoden.  'In  the dark hour  before dawn I doubted, but we
will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.'
'I  wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be  now,' said  Gandalf,
'and since he  has done you  great injury, it  would  be fitting if you were
there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?'
'My  men  are weary with battle,' said the King; 'and  I am weary also.
For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My  old age is not feigned nor
due only to the  whisperings  of  Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can
wholly cure, not even Gandalf.'
'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will
journey under the shadow of evening. It is  as well;  for  it is my  counsel
that all our comings and goings should be as  secret as may  be, henceforth.
But do not command many  men to go with you, Thjoden. We go to  a parley
not
to a fight.'
The King then chose  men that  were unhurt and had swift horses, and he
sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and
they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste
to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark  would  hold an  assembly  of all that
could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To  ride with him to
Isengard the King chose Jomer and twenty men of his household. With
Gandalf
would go  Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite  of his hurt  the  dwarf
would not stay behind.
'It  was only a  feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.'
'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn.
The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quiet
as he had not known for many years,  and the remainder of his chosen company
rested also. But the others, all that  were not  hurt  or wounded,  began  a
great labour; for many had fallen  in the battle and lay dead upon the field
or in the Deep.
No  Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But  a great many
of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,  and cried for
mercy.
The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work.
'Help  now  to  repair  the  evil  in  which  you  have  joined,'  said
Erkenbrand;  'and afterwards you  shall take an oath never again to pass the
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march  with the  enemies of Men;  and then you
shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded  by Saruman. Many
of  you  have got  death  as  the  reward  of your trust in him; but had you
conquered, little better would your wages have been.'
The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told  them that the men
of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.
In the  midst of  the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised,
and  beneath them  were laid  all  the Riders of the Mark who  fell  in  the
defence, those of the  East Dales upon one side, and  those of Westfold upon
the  other. In a_ grave alone  under the shadow  of  the Hornburg  lay Hbma,
captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate.
