But do not command many  men to go with you, Thjoden. We go to  a parley
not
to a fight.'
The King then chose  men that  were unhurt and had swift horses, and he
sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and
they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste
to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark  would  hold an  assembly  of all that
could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To  ride with him to
Isengard the King chose Jomer and twenty men of his household. With
Gandalf
would go  Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite  of his hurt  the  dwarf
would not stay behind.
'It  was only a  feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.'
'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn.
The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quiet
as he had not known for many years,  and the remainder of his chosen company
rested also. But the others, all that  were not  hurt  or wounded,  began  a
great labour; for many had fallen  in the battle and lay dead upon the field
or in the Deep.
No  Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But  a great many
of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,  and cried for
mercy.
The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work.
'Help  now  to  repair  the  evil  in  which  you  have  joined,'  said
Erkenbrand;  'and afterwards you  shall take an oath never again to pass the
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march  with the  enemies of Men;  and then you
shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded  by Saruman. Many
of  you  have got  death  as  the  reward  of your trust in him; but had you
conquered, little better would your wages have been.'
The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told  them that the men
of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.
In the  midst of  the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised,
and  beneath them  were laid  all  the Riders of the Mark who  fell  in  the
defence, those of the  East Dales upon one side, and  those of Westfold upon
the  other. In a_ grave alone  under the shadow  of  the Hornburg  lay Hbma,
captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate.
The Orcs  were piled in great heaps, away  from the mounds  of Men, not
far  from  the eaves of the forest. And the people  were  troubled in  their
minds; for the  heaps of carrion were too great  for burial or for  burning.
They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to
the strange trees, even if Gandalf had not warned them to hurt  neither bark
nor bough at their great peril.
'Let the Orcs lie,' said Gandalf. 'The morning may bring new counsel.'
In  the  afternoon the King's company prepared  to depart.  The work of
burial was then but beginning; and Thjoden mourned for the loss of Hbma, his
captain,  and cast the first earth upon  his grave. 'Great injury indeed has
Saruman  done  to me and all  this land,' he said; 'and  I will remember it,
when we meet.'
The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west  of the Coomb,
when  at last  Thjoden and Gandalf and their companions  rode down from  the
Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host,  both of the Riders and of the
people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out
from
the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell
silent, wondering what would chance,  for their  eyes were on the trees  and
they feared them.
The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and  man, they were
unwilling  to  pass in. The trees were grey and menacing, and a shadow  or a
mist  was about them. The ends of their long  sweeping boughs hung down like
searching  fingers, their roots  stood up from the ground like the  limbs of
strange monsters,  and  dark  caverns opened beneath them.  But Gandalf went
forward, leading the company, and where the road from  the Hornburg  met the
trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate  under mighty  boughs; and
through  it  Gandalf passed,  and they followed him. Then to their amazement
they  found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream  beside it; and the
sky was open above  and  full of golden light. But on either side the  great
aisles  of the  wood  were  already  wrapped in  dusk,  stretching away into
impenetrable shadows; and there  they  heard the  creaking  and  groaning of
boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of  wordless  voices, murmuring angrily.
No Orc or other living creature could be seen.
Legolas  and  Gimli were now riding  together  upon one horse; and they
kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.
'It is hot in  here,'  said Legolas  to Gandalf. 'I feel  a great wrath
about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?'
'Yes,' said Gandalf.
'What has become of the miserable Orcs?' said Legolas.
'That, I think, no one will ever know,' said Gandalf.
They  rode  in silence for a while; but  Legolas was ever glancing from
side to side, and would often have halted  to  listen to  the  sounds of the
wood, if Gimli had allowed it.
'These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,'  he said; 'and  I have
seen many  an  oak grow from acorn  to ruinous age.  I wish that  there were
leisure now to walk among  them: they have voices, and  in time I might come
to understand their thought.'
'No, no!'  said  Gimli.  'Let  us leave  them!  I guess  their  thought
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their  speech is of crushing
and strangling.'
'Not of all that go on two legs,' said  Legolas. 'There I think you are
wrong.  It is Orcs that they hate.  For they  do not  belong  here and  know
little of Elves and  Men. Far away  are the valleys where they sprang.  From
the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.'
'Then that is the most  perilous wood in Middle-earth,'  said Gimli. 'I
should  be grateful for  the part they have played, but I  do not love them.
You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land,
more beautiful than any grove or glade that  ever  grew: my  heart  is still
full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the
marvels of the Northern  World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say!
Caves! Holes to fly to in time of  war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas,
do you  know that the caverns of Helm's Deep  are vast and beautiful?  There
would  be an  endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such
things  were known  to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold  for a brief
glance!'
'And I would give  gold to be excused,' said Legolas; 'and double to be
let out, if I strayed in!'
'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,' said Gimli. 'But you speak
like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under
the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long  ago? They are
but hovels compared with  the caverns I have  seen here: immeasurable halls,
filled with an everlasting music  of  water that tinkles into pools, as fair
as Kheled-zvram in the starlight.
