about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?'
'Yes,' said Gandalf.
'What has become of the miserable Orcs?' said Legolas.
'That, I think, no one will ever know,' said Gandalf.
They  rode  in silence for a while; but  Legolas was ever glancing from
side to side, and would often have halted  to  listen to  the  sounds of the
wood, if Gimli had allowed it.
'These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,'  he said; 'and  I have
seen many  an  oak grow from acorn  to ruinous age.  I wish that  there were
leisure now to walk among  them: they have voices, and  in time I might come
to understand their thought.'
'No, no!'  said  Gimli.  'Let  us leave  them!  I guess  their  thought
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their  speech is of crushing
and strangling.'
'Not of all that go on two legs,' said  Legolas. 'There I think you are
wrong.  It is Orcs that they hate.  For they  do not  belong  here and  know
little of Elves and  Men. Far away  are the valleys where they sprang.  From
the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.'
'Then that is the most  perilous wood in Middle-earth,'  said Gimli. 'I
should  be grateful for  the part they have played, but I  do not love them.
You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land,
more beautiful than any grove or glade that  ever  grew: my  heart  is still
full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the
marvels of the Northern  World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say!
Caves! Holes to fly to in time of  war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas,
do you  know that the caverns of Helm's Deep  are vast and beautiful?  There
would  be an  endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such
things  were known  to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold  for a brief
glance!'
'And I would give  gold to be excused,' said Legolas; 'and double to be
let out, if I strayed in!'
'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,' said Gimli. 'But you speak
like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under
the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long  ago? They are
but hovels compared with  the caverns I have  seen here: immeasurable halls,
filled with an everlasting music  of  water that tinkles into pools, as fair
as Kheled-zvram in the starlight.
'And, Legolas,  when the torches are kindled and men walk  on the sandy
floors  under  the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas,  gems  and crystals and
veins of  precious ore  glint  in the polished  walls; and  the  light glows
through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen
Galadriel.  There are  columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose,  Legolas,
fluted  and twisted into dreamlike forms;  they spring up from many-coloured
floors to meet the glistening pendants  of  the roof: wings, ropes, curtains
fine as  frozen  clouds; spears,  banners, pinnacles  of suspended  palaces!
Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered
with clear glass;  cities.  such as  the  mind  of Durin  could  scarce have
imagined in his sleep,  stretch  on through avenues and pillared  courts, on
into  the dark recesses  where no light can come.  And  plink! a silver drop
falls,  and the round wrinkles in  the glass make all  the  towers  bend and
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they
fade  and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another  chamber and another
dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas;  hall opening  out of  hall,
dome after  dome,  stair beyond  stair; and still  the winding paths lead on
into the mountains' heart.  Caves! The Caverns of Helm's Deep! Happy was the
chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.'
'Then I  will wish you this fortune for your  comfort, Gimli,' said the
Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to  see  them again. But do
not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your
account. Maybe the men of  this land  are wise  to say little: one family of
busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.'
'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be  unmoved by
such loveliness. None  of Durin's race would mine those  caves for stones or
ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there.  Do you cut down groves of
blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades
of flowering  stone, not  quarry them. With cautious skill, tap  by tap -- a
small  chip of rock and no  more, perhaps, in a whole  anxious  day -- so we
could work,  and  as the  years went  by, we  should open  up new  ways, and
display far chambers that  are still dark, glimpsed  only as a  void  beyond
fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps
as once shone  in Khazad-dym; and when  we  wished  we  would drive away
the
night  that has  lain there  since the hills were made; and when we  desired
rest, we would let the night return.'
'You  move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like
this  before. Almost you make  me regret that  I  have not seen these caves.
Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that
await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with
me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.'
'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli.
'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves
and share their wonder with me.'
'You have  my promise,' said Legolas. 'But  alas!  Now  we  must  leave
behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We  are coming to the end of the
trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'
'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf:
'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to  the Fords: and ten more from there
to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.'
'And  when we come there,  what shall  we see?'  asked Gimli. 'You  may
know, but I cannot guess.'
'I do  not know myself for certain,'  answered the wizard. 'I was there
at  nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet  I think that
you will not say that the journey was  in vain  -- not though the Glittering
Caves of Aglarond be left behind.'
At last the company passed  through  the trees, and found that they had
come to the bottom of the Coomb, where  the road from Helm's  Deep
branched,
going one way east to  Edoras,  and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As
they  rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas  halted and looked back
with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.
'There are eyes!' he said.  'Eyes looking out  from the shadows  of the
boughs! I never saw such eyes before.'
The others,  surprised  by  his cry,  halted  and turned;  but  Legolas
started to ride back.
'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do  as  you please in your madness,  but let me
first get  down  from  this horse! I wish  to see  no eyes!' 'Stay,  Legolas
Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not
your time.'
Even as he spoke,  there came forward out of  the  trees three  strange
shapes.  As  tall as trolls they were, twelve feet  or more in height; their
strong bodies, stout as  young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with
