'You  move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like
this  before. Almost you make  me regret that  I  have not seen these caves.
Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that
await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with
me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.'
'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli.
'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves
and share their wonder with me.'
'You have  my promise,' said Legolas. 'But  alas!  Now  we  must  leave
behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We  are coming to the end of the
trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'
'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf:
'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to  the Fords: and ten more from there
to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.'
'And  when we come there,  what shall  we see?'  asked Gimli. 'You  may
know, but I cannot guess.'
'I do  not know myself for certain,'  answered the wizard. 'I was there
at  nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet  I think that
you will not say that the journey was  in vain  -- not though the Glittering
Caves of Aglarond be left behind.'
At last the company passed  through  the trees, and found that they had
come to the bottom of the Coomb, where  the road from Helm's  Deep
branched,
going one way east to  Edoras,  and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As
they  rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas  halted and looked back
with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.
'There are eyes!' he said.  'Eyes looking out  from the shadows  of the
boughs! I never saw such eyes before.'
The others,  surprised  by  his cry,  halted  and turned;  but  Legolas
started to ride back.
'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do  as  you please in your madness,  but let me
first get  down  from  this horse! I wish  to see  no eyes!' 'Stay,  Legolas
Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not
your time.'
Even as he spoke,  there came forward out of  the  trees three  strange
shapes.  As  tall as trolls they were, twelve feet  or more in height; their
strong bodies, stout as  young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with
hide of close-fitting grey and brown. Their limbs were long, and their hands
had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss.
They gazed out with solemn  eyes, but they were not  looking at the  riders:
their eyes were bent northwards.  Suddenly they  lifted their long  hands to
their  mouths, and  sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes  of a horn, but
more musical and various.  The calls  were answered; and turning  again, the
riders  saw other creatures of the same  kind approaching, striding  through
the grass. They came swiftly from the North, walking  like wading herons  in
their gait,  but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat
quicker than the heron's  wings.  The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some
set their hands upon their sword-hilts.
'You need no  weapons,' said Gandalf. 'These are but herdsmen. They are
not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.'
So  it  seemed to be;  for  as  he spoke the tall creatures,  without a
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished.
'Herdsmen!'  said  Thjoden. 'Where  are their  flocks? What  are  they,
Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.'
'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long
since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land
who, out  of the twisted  threads of story, could pick the  answer  to  your
question. You have seen  Ents, O King, Ents out of  Fangorn Forest, which in
your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only
in  idle  fancy?  Nay, Thjoden,  it is otherwise: to  them  you are  but the
passing tale;  all the years from Eorl the Young to Thjoden  the  Old are of
little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.'
The king was silent. 'Ents!' he said at  length. 'Out of the shadows of
legend I  begin a little to  understand the marvel  of the trees, I think. I
have  lived  to see  strange  days. Long  we have tended our beasts  and our
fields, built our houses, wrought  our tools, or ridden away to help in  the
wars  of  Minas Tirith. And that we called  the life of Men,  the way of the
world. We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land. Songs we
have that  tell of these things, but we are forgetting them,  teaching  them
only  to children, as  a careless custom. And now  the  songs have come down
among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.'
'You should  be  glad, Thjoden  King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only  the
little  life  of Men is  now endangered, but the  life also of  those things
which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even
if you know them not.'
'Yet  also I should  be sad,' said Thjoden. 'For however the fortune of
war shall go, may it not so end  that much that was fair and wonderful shall
pass for ever out of Middle-earth?'
'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor
made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on
with the journey we have begun!'
The company turned then away from the  Coomb and from the wood and
took
the  road  towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set,
already  it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but  as they rode out from
the shadow of  the  hills  and looked west to the  Gap  of Rohan the sky was
still  red, and a burning light was under the  floating clouds. Dark against
it there wheeled and flew many black-winged birds. Some passed overhead
with
mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks.
'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Jomer.
They rode now at an easy pace and dark came  down upon the plains about
them. The slow moon mounted,  now  waxing towards the full, and  in its cold
silver light the swelling grass-lands  rose and fell  like a wide  grey sea.
They  had ridden for  some four  hours from  the branching of the roads when
they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river
spread  in stony shoals  between high grassy terraces. Borne upon  the  wind
they heard the howling of  wolves. Their hearts were heavy,  remembering the
many men that had fallen in battle in this place.
The  road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the
terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were
three  lines of flat stepping-stones  across  the  stream,  and between them
fords for horses, that went from either brink to a  bare  eyot in the midst.
The riders looked down upon the crossings,  and  it seemed strange to  them;
for the Fords had ever been a place full  of the rush  and  chatter of water
upon stones; but now they  were  silent. The beds of the  stream were almost
dry, a bare waste of shingles and grey sand.
'This  is  become  a  dreary  place,'  said Jomer. 'What  sickness  has
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has  destroyed: has he devoured
the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf.
'Alas!' said Thjoden. 'Must we pass this way,  where the carrion-beasts
