if you know them not.'
'Yet  also I should  be sad,' said Thjoden. 'For however the fortune of
war shall go, may it not so end  that much that was fair and wonderful shall
pass for ever out of Middle-earth?'
'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor
made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on
with the journey we have begun!'
The company turned then away from the  Coomb and from the wood and
took
the  road  towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set,
already  it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but  as they rode out from
the shadow of  the  hills  and looked west to the  Gap  of Rohan the sky was
still  red, and a burning light was under the  floating clouds. Dark against
it there wheeled and flew many black-winged birds. Some passed overhead
with
mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks.
'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Jomer.
They rode now at an easy pace and dark came  down upon the plains about
them. The slow moon mounted,  now  waxing towards the full, and  in its cold
silver light the swelling grass-lands  rose and fell  like a wide  grey sea.
They  had ridden for  some four  hours from  the branching of the roads when
they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river
spread  in stony shoals  between high grassy terraces. Borne upon  the  wind
they heard the howling of  wolves. Their hearts were heavy,  remembering the
many men that had fallen in battle in this place.
The  road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the
terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were
three  lines of flat stepping-stones  across  the  stream,  and between them
fords for horses, that went from either brink to a  bare  eyot in the midst.
The riders looked down upon the crossings,  and  it seemed strange to  them;
for the Fords had ever been a place full  of the rush  and  chatter of water
upon stones; but now they  were  silent. The beds of the  stream were almost
dry, a bare waste of shingles and grey sand.
'This  is  become  a  dreary  place,'  said Jomer. 'What  sickness  has
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has  destroyed: has he devoured
the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf.
'Alas!' said Thjoden. 'Must we pass this way,  where the carrion-beasts
devour so many good Riders of the Mark?'
'This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but
you shall see that at least the wolves  of the mountains do not devour them.
It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast:  such indeed
is the friendship of their kind. Come!'
They rode down to the river,  and as  they came the wolves ceased their
howling and  slunk away. Fear  fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon,  and
Shadowfax his horse shining like  silver.  The  riders  passed  over to  the
islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks.
'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.'
And they saw that  in the midst  of the eyot  a mound was piled, ringed
with stones, and set about with many spears.
'Here  lie  all the  Men of the Mark that fell  near this place,'  said
Gandalf.
'Here let them rest!' said Jomer. 'And when  their  spears  have rotted
and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!'
'Is  this  your work  also, Gandalf,  my  friend?'  said Thjoden.  'You
accomplished much in an evening and a night!'
'With  the help of Shadowfax -- and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast
and  far.  But here beside the  mound I will say this for your comfort: many
fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were
scattered than were slain;  I gathered together all that I  could find. Some
men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold  to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make
this burial. They  have now followed your marshal,  Elfhelm. I sent him with
many Riders  to Edoras.  Saruman  I  knew had  despatched  his full strength
against you, and his  servants  had turned aside from all  other errands and
gone to Helm's Deep: the  lands seemed empty  of enemies; yet I  feared that
wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless  to Meduseld, while it was
undefended. But now I  think you need not fear:  you will find your house to
welcome your return.'
'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Thjoden, 'though brief now,
I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.'
With that the  company said  farewell to the island  and the mound, and
passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad
to have left the mournful  Fords. As they  went  the  howling of the  wolves
broke out anew.
There  was an  ancient highway that  ran  down  from  Isengard  to  the
crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending with it
east  and  then north; but at  the last it  turned away  and  went  straight
towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the
west of the valley, sixteen miles  or more from its mouth.  This  road  they
followed but they  did not ride upon it;  for the ground beside it  was firm
and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode
now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind.
Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They
were come to  the feet  of the  Misty  Mountains, and the long  arms of  Nan
Curunnr stretched down to  meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the
moon had  passed  into  the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But
out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as
it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering
billows, black and silver, over the starry sky.
'What do you  think  of that,  Gandalf?' asked Aragorn.  'One would say
that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'
'There  is ever a fume above  that  valley in these  days,' said Jomer:
'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are  steams rather than
smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all
the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.'
'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing.
Now let us rest for a while, if we can.'
They camped  beside  the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and
empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried
out, and all awoke. The moon was gone.  Stars were  shining  above; but over
the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night.  On both  sides of
the river it rolled towards them, going northward.
'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will
pass you by!'
A mist gathered about  them. Above  them a  few stars  still  glimmered
faintly;  but  on either side there arose  walls of impenetrable gloom; they
were in a narrow  lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices  they  heard,
whisperings  and groanings and an  endless  rustling sigh;  the  earth shook
under them. Long  it  seemed to them that they sat  and  were afraid; but at
last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's
arms.
Away south upon the Hornburg, in the  middle  night  men heard a  great
