crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending with it
east  and  then north; but at  the last it  turned away  and  went  straight
towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the
west of the valley, sixteen miles  or more from its mouth.  This  road  they
followed but they  did not ride upon it;  for the ground beside it  was firm
and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode
now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind.
Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They
were come to  the feet  of the  Misty  Mountains, and the long  arms of  Nan
Curunnr stretched down to  meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the
moon had  passed  into  the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But
out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as
it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering
billows, black and silver, over the starry sky.
'What do you  think  of that,  Gandalf?' asked Aragorn.  'One would say
that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'
'There  is ever a fume above  that  valley in these  days,' said Jomer:
'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are  steams rather than
smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all
the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.'
'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing.
Now let us rest for a while, if we can.'
They camped  beside  the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and
empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried
out, and all awoke. The moon was gone.  Stars were  shining  above; but over
the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night.  On both  sides of
the river it rolled towards them, going northward.
'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will
pass you by!'
A mist gathered about  them. Above  them a  few stars  still  glimmered
faintly;  but  on either side there arose  walls of impenetrable gloom; they
were in a narrow  lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices  they  heard,
whisperings  and groanings and an  endless  rustling sigh;  the  earth shook
under them. Long  it  seemed to them that they sat  and  were afraid; but at
last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's
arms.
Away south upon the Hornburg, in the  middle  night  men heard a  great
noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid
and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning  they went  out and were
amazed; for  the slain Orcs were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the
valley of the Deep  the grass was crushed  and trampled brown,  as if  giant
herdsmen had  pastured  great droves of  cattle there;  but a mile below the
Dike a huge pit had  been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled
into  a  hill.  Men believed that the Orcs whom they had  slain  were buried
there;  but whether those  who had  fled into  the wood were with them, none
could say, for no man  ever  set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it  was
afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were
never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had  returned at night, and had gone
far  away to the dark dales  of  Fangorn.  Thus they were  revenged upon the
Orcs.
The king  and his company slept  no more that  night;  but they saw and
heard  no other strange thing,  save one: the voice of the river beside them
suddenly  awoke. There  was a  rush of water hurrying down among the stones;
and when it had  passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it
had ever done.
At  dawn  they made ready to go on. The light came grey  and pale,  and
they  did  not see  the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog,
and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the
highway.  It  was broad and  hard, and  well-tended. Dimly through the mists
they could  descry the long arm of the mountains rising on  their left. They
had passed into Nan Curunnr, the Wizard's Vale. That was a sheltered valley,
open only to the South. Once  it had been fair and green, and through it the
Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found  the plains; for it was
fed by many springs and lesser streams among  the rain-washed hills. and all
about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land.
It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres
tilled  by  the  slaves  of Saruman;  but  most  of the valley had  become a
wilderness of  weeds and  thorns.  Brambles  trailed  upon  the  ground,  or
clambering over bush and  bank, made shaggy caves where small beasts
housed.
No  trees grew there; but among  the rank  grasses  could still be  seen the
burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It  was  a sad country, silent
now  but for the stony noise  of quick  waters. Smokes and steams drifted in
sullen clouds and lurked  in the  hollows. The  riders did  not speak.  Many
doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led.
After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street,
paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of grass
was seen in any joint. Deep  gutters, filled with  trickling water. ran down
on either side. Suddenly  a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black;
and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness  of  a
long  White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew  that  the
gates of Isengard  must stand, and  their hearts  were heavy; but their eyes
could not pierce the mists ahead.
Beneath  the  mountain's  arm within  the  Wizard's Vale through  years
uncounted had stood that ancient place that  Men called Isengard.  Partly it
was shaped  in  the making of  the mountains, but  mighty works  the  Men of
Westernesse had wrought there of  old; and Saruman  had dwelt there long and
had not been idle.
This  was  its fashion,  while Saruman was at  his height, accounted by
many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs,
stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which it ran  and then
returned again. One entrance only was there made in  it, a great arch delved
in the  southern wall. Here  through the black  rock a long  tunnel had been
hewn, closed at either end with mighty  doors of iron.  They were so wrought
and poised upon their  huge hinges, posts of  steel driven  into the  living
stone, that  when unbarred they could  be moved with  a light  thrust of the
arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of  the  echoing
tunnel,  beheld a  plain,  a great  circle, somewhat  hollowed  like a  vast
shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and
filled  with avenues, and  groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that
flowed  from the mountains to  a lake. But no green thing grew there  in the
latter  days of Saruman. The  roads were  paved with stone-flags,  dark  and
hard;  and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of
pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron. joined by heavy chains.
Many  houses  there  were,  chambers,  halls,  and  passages,  cut  and
tunnelled back into the  walls upon their  inner side, so that all  the open
circle  was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands  could
dwell  there,  workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with  great  store of
arms; wolves  were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was
bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the  ground; their upper ends
were  covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the
