doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led.
After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street,
paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of grass
was seen in any joint. Deep  gutters, filled with  trickling water. ran down
on either side. Suddenly  a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black;
and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness  of  a
long  White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew  that  the
gates of Isengard  must stand, and  their hearts  were heavy; but their eyes
could not pierce the mists ahead.
Beneath  the  mountain's  arm within  the  Wizard's Vale through  years
uncounted had stood that ancient place that  Men called Isengard.  Partly it
was shaped  in  the making of  the mountains, but  mighty works  the  Men of
Westernesse had wrought there of  old; and Saruman  had dwelt there long and
had not been idle.
This  was  its fashion,  while Saruman was at  his height, accounted by
many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs,
stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which it ran  and then
returned again. One entrance only was there made in  it, a great arch delved
in the  southern wall. Here  through the black  rock a long  tunnel had been
hewn, closed at either end with mighty  doors of iron.  They were so wrought
and poised upon their  huge hinges, posts of  steel driven  into the  living
stone, that  when unbarred they could  be moved with  a light  thrust of the
arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of  the  echoing
tunnel,  beheld a  plain,  a great  circle, somewhat  hollowed  like a  vast
shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and
filled  with avenues, and  groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that
flowed  from the mountains to  a lake. But no green thing grew there  in the
latter  days of Saruman. The  roads were  paved with stone-flags,  dark  and
hard;  and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of
pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron. joined by heavy chains.
Many  houses  there  were,  chambers,  halls,  and  passages,  cut  and
tunnelled back into the  walls upon their  inner side, so that all  the open
circle  was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands  could
dwell  there,  workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with  great  store of
arms; wolves  were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was
bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the  ground; their upper ends
were  covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the
Ring  of Isengard looked like a  graveyard  of  unquiet dead. For the ground
trembled. The shafts  ran  down by many slopes and  spiral stairs to caverns
far under; there Saruman had treasuries,  store-houses, armouries, smithies,
and  great  furnaces.  Iron  wheels  revolved  there endlessly, and  hammers
thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit  from beneath
with red light, or blue, or venomous green.
To the  centre  all the roads ran between  their chains. There stood  a
tower of  marvellous shape.  It  was  fashioned by  the builders of old, who
smoothed  the  Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed  a thing not  made by the
craft  of Men, but riven from the bones of the  earth in the ancient torment
of the hills. A peak and isle of rock  it was. black and gleaming hard: four
mighty piers of many-sided stone were  welded  into one, but near the summit
they  opened  into gaping  horns. their  pinnacles sharp  as the  points  of
spears, keen-edged as  knives. Between  them was a narrow  space,  and there
upon a floor of  polished stone,  written  with  strange signs,  a man might
stand  five  hundred feet above the plain. This was Orthanc,  the citadel of
Saruman, the  name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for
in the Elvish  speech      orthanc     signifies Mount Fang,  but in the language of
the Mark of old the Cunning Mind.
A strong  place  and wonderful  was  Isengard,  and  long  it had  been
beautiful;  and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of  Gondor upon the
West, and wise men that watched the stars.  But Saruman had slowly shaped it
to  his  shifting  purposes,  and made  it  better.  as  he  thought,  being
deceived-for  all  those arts and  subtle devices, for which  he forsook his
former  wisdom, and which fondly  he imagined  were his own. came  but
from
Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model
or a slave's  flattery, of that  vast fortress. armoury, prison,  furnace of
great power, Barad-dyr, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed
at  flattery, biding its  time, secure  in  its pride and  its  immeasurable
strength.
This  was  the stronghold of  Saruman, as  fame reported it; for within
living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few,
such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw.
Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as
he did so the Riders  saw to  their wonder that  the Hand appeared no longer
white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived
that its  nails were red.  Unheeding  Gandalf rode  on  into  the mist,  and
reluctantly  they followed him. All about them now,  as if  there had been a
sudden flood.  wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows.
and rills went trickling down among the stones.
At last Gandalf  halted  and beckoned to them; and they  came, and  saw
that beyond him  the mists  had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour
of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard.
But the  doors lay  hurled and twisted  on the ground.  And  all about,
stone, cracked  and  splintered into  countless jagged shards, was scattered
far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch  still stood, but it
opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare.  and through the
cliff-like walls  on  either side great  rents  and  breaches had been torn;
their towers were beaten into  dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and
fallen on the hills with storm. it could have worked no greater ruin.
The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in
which  there heaved  and floated  a wreckage of beams and  spars, chests and
casks and broken  gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their  splintered
stems above the  flood. but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it  seemed,
half veiled in  winding cloud, there loomed the  island rock. Still dark and
tall, unbroken by the storm,  the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped
about its feet.
The  king and all his company  sat silent on  their horses, marvelling,
perceiving  that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not
guess.  And  now they turned their eyes towards the archway  and  the ruined
gates. There they  saw close  beside  them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly
they were aware  of two small figures  lying on it at their ease, grey-clad,
hardly  to  be seen  among  the  stones. There were  bottles and  bowls  and
platters  laid beside them, as if  they had just eaten  well, and now rested
from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs  and arms
behind his head,  leaned  back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth
long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke.
For  a  moment Thjoden  and Jomer  and all  his men  stared at  them in
wonder.  Amid all the  wreck  of Isengard  this seemed to them the strangest
sight.  But  before the king could speak,  the  small smoke-breathing figure
became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent  on the edge of  the
mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though  not
much  more than half a man  in height; his head  of  brown curling hair  was
