that its  nails were red.  Unheeding  Gandalf rode  on  into  the mist,  and
reluctantly  they followed him. All about them now,  as if  there had been a
sudden flood.  wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows.
and rills went trickling down among the stones.
At last Gandalf  halted  and beckoned to them; and they  came, and  saw
that beyond him  the mists  had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour
of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard.
But the  doors lay  hurled and twisted  on the ground.  And  all about,
stone, cracked  and  splintered into  countless jagged shards, was scattered
far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch  still stood, but it
opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare.  and through the
cliff-like walls  on  either side great  rents  and  breaches had been torn;
their towers were beaten into  dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and
fallen on the hills with storm. it could have worked no greater ruin.
The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in
which  there heaved  and floated  a wreckage of beams and  spars, chests and
casks and broken  gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their  splintered
stems above the  flood. but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it  seemed,
half veiled in  winding cloud, there loomed the  island rock. Still dark and
tall, unbroken by the storm,  the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped
about its feet.
The  king and all his company  sat silent on  their horses, marvelling,
perceiving  that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not
guess.  And  now they turned their eyes towards the archway  and  the ruined
gates. There they  saw close  beside  them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly
they were aware  of two small figures  lying on it at their ease, grey-clad,
hardly  to  be seen  among  the  stones. There were  bottles and  bowls  and
platters  laid beside them, as if  they had just eaten  well, and now rested
from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs  and arms
behind his head,  leaned  back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth
long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke.
For  a  moment Thjoden  and Jomer  and all  his men  stared at  them in
wonder.  Amid all the  wreck  of Isengard  this seemed to them the strangest
sight.  But  before the king could speak,  the  small smoke-breathing figure
became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent  on the edge of  the
mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though  not
much  more than half a man  in height; his head  of  brown curling hair  was
uncovered,  but he was  clad in a  travel-stained cloak of the same  hue and
shape as the companions  of Gandalf had worn when  they rode  to Edoras.  He
bowed very low. putting  his  hand upon  his breast.  Then,  seeming not  to
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Jomer and the king.
'Welcome, my lords,  to  Isengard!' he said. 'We  are  the doorwardens.
Meriadoc,  son  of  Saradoc  is  my  name; and my  companion, who,  alas! is
overcome with  weariness' -- here he gave the other a dig with  his  foot --
'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North  is our
home. The Lord Saruman  is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one
Wormtongue,  or  doubtless  he  would be here  to  welcome  such  honourable
guests.'
'Doubtless he would!' laughed Gandalf. 'And was it Saruman that ordered
you to  guard his  damaged  doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when
your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?'
'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He  has
been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who  has taken  over
the
management of Isengard. He  commanded me to  welcome  the Lord of Rohan
with
fitting words. I have done my best.'
'And  what about  your companions?  What about  Legolas  and me?' cried
Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. 'You rascals, you woolly-footed and
wool-pated truants!  A fine  hunt you  have  led  us! Two  hundred  leagues,
through  fen and forest, battle  and death, to  rescue you! And here we find
you feasting and  idling-and smoking!  Smoking! Where did  you  come  by the
weed, you villains?  Hammer and  tongs!  I am so torn between  rage and joy,
that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!'
'You  speak  for  me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas.  'Though I would  sooner
learn how they came by the wine.'
'One thing you  have  not found  in your hunting,  and that's  brighter
wits,' said  Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of
victory, amid  the plunder of armies, and  you wonder how we  came by  a few
well-earned comforts!'
'Well-earned?' said Gimli. 'I cannot believe that!'
The  Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted  that we witness the meeting
of dear friends,' said Thjoden. 'So these are the lost ones of your company,
Gandalf? The days are fated  to  be filled with marvels. Already I have seen
many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of
the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the
Holbytlan?'
'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin.
'Hobbits?'  said Thjoden. 'Your  tongue is  strangely changed; but  the
name sounds  not  unfitting so.  Hobbits! No report that I have  heard  does
justice to the truth.'
Merry  bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord;
or I hope  that I may so take your words,'  he said.  'And  here is  another
marvel! I have wandered in  many lands, since I left my home, and never till
now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.'
'My people came out of the North long  ago,' said  Thjoden. 'But I will
not deceive  you: we know no tales  about hobbits. All that is said among us
is that far away, over many hills and  rivers, live  the halfling folk  that
dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their  deeds.  for
it  is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of  men, being able  to
vanish in  a  twinkling: and they  can change their voices  to  resemble the
piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.'
'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry.
'For one thing,' said Thjoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke
from their mouths.'
'That is not surprising,'  answered Merry; 'for  it is an art which  we
have  not  practised  for  more  than  a  few  generations.  It  was  Tobold
Hornblower,  of Longbottom  in the Southfarthing,  who  first grew  the true
pipe-weed  in his gardens, about  the year  1070 according to our reckoning.
How old Toby came by the plant...'
'You do  not  know your  danger,  Thjoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These
hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table,
or the small doings of  their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers,
and  remoter cousins to the ninth degree,  if  you encourage them with undue
patience. Some  other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking.
Where is Treebeard, Merry?'
'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to  get  a  drink-of  clean
water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work -- over
there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as  they looked,
they heard a  distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was  falling
from  the  mountain-side.  Far  away  came a               hoom-hom      , as of  horns blowing
