many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of
the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the
Holbytlan?'
'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin.
'Hobbits?'  said Thjoden. 'Your  tongue is  strangely changed; but  the
name sounds  not  unfitting so.  Hobbits! No report that I have  heard  does
justice to the truth.'
Merry  bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord;
or I hope  that I may so take your words,'  he said.  'And  here is  another
marvel! I have wandered in  many lands, since I left my home, and never till
now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.'
'My people came out of the North long  ago,' said  Thjoden. 'But I will
not deceive  you: we know no tales  about hobbits. All that is said among us
is that far away, over many hills and  rivers, live  the halfling folk  that
dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their  deeds.  for
it  is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of  men, being able  to
vanish in  a  twinkling: and they  can change their voices  to  resemble the
piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.'
'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry.
'For one thing,' said Thjoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke
from their mouths.'
'That is not surprising,'  answered Merry; 'for  it is an art which  we
have  not  practised  for  more  than  a  few  generations.  It  was  Tobold
Hornblower,  of Longbottom  in the Southfarthing,  who  first grew  the true
pipe-weed  in his gardens, about  the year  1070 according to our reckoning.
How old Toby came by the plant...'
'You do  not  know your  danger,  Thjoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These
hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table,
or the small doings of  their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers,
and  remoter cousins to the ninth degree,  if  you encourage them with undue
patience. Some  other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking.
Where is Treebeard, Merry?'
'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to  get  a  drink-of  clean
water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work -- over
there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as  they looked,
they heard a  distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was  falling
from  the  mountain-side.  Far  away  came a               hoom-hom      , as of  horns blowing
triumphantly.
'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf.
'There is  the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and  some  others are
watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain  are of  Saruman's
planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.'
'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his
sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.'
'It is  past  noon,'  said Gandalf, 'and we at any  rate have not eaten
since early morning. Yet I wish  to  see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he
leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?'
'He left a message,' said  Merry, 'and  I was coming to  it, but I have
been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the
Mark and Gandalf  will ride  to  the northern wall  they will find Treebeard
there,  and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of
the best there, it  was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He
bowed.
Gandalf laughed. 'That is  better!' he  said. 'Well,  Thjoden. will you
ride with me  to find Treebeard?  We must go round about, but it is not far.
When you see Treebeard,  you will learn much. For  Treebeard is Fangorn, and
the eldest and chief of the  Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear
the speech of the oldest of all living things.'
'I  will come with you,' said  Thjoden. 'Farewell, my hobbits!  May  we
meet again in my house! There  you shall sit beside me and tell  me all that
your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires,  as far as  you can reckon
them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!'
The hobbits bowed low. 'So that  is the King of Rohan!'  said Pippin in
an undertone. 'A fine old fellow. Very polite.'
Chapter 9. Flotsam and Jetsam
Gandalf and the King's  company rode away, turning eastward to make the
circuit of the ruined  walls of Isengard.  But  Aragorn, Gimli,  and Legolas
remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to  stray in search of grass, they
came and sat beside the hobbits.
'Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of
us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn.
'And now  that the  great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said
Legolas,  'the hunters  can  perhaps learn the  answers  to  their own small
riddles. We tracked you  as  far  as  the forest, but there  are  still many
things that I should like to know the truth of.'
'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to  know about you ' said
Merry. 'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that
is not nearly enough.'
'All  in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should
give an account of yourselves to us first.'
'Or  second,' said Gimli. 'It would  go better after a meal. t  have  a
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make  amends by finding
us some of the plunder that you spoke  of. Food and drink would pay off some
of my score against you.'
'Then you shall  have  it,' said Pippin.  'Will you have it here, or in
more  comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house--over  there under the
arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.'
'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But  I will not go into  any orc-house
nor touch Orcs' meat or anything that they have mauled.'
'We wouldn't  ask  you  to,' said Merry. 'We have had  enough  of  Orcs
ourselves to last a life-time. But there  were  many other folk in Isengard.
Saruman  kept enough wisdom not  to  trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his
gates:  some of his  most faithful  servants,  I  suppose. Anyway  they were
favoured and got good provisions.'
'And pipe-weed?' asked Gimli.
'No,  I  don't  think  so,' Merry laughed. 'But that  is another story,
which can wait until after lunch.'
'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf.
