them when the fire had died away. A fox passing through the wood on business
of his own stopped several minutes and sniffed.
'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings
in this land,  but  I have  seldom  heard of a hobbit  sleeping out of doors
under a tree. Three of them! There's something mighty queer behind this.' He
was quite right, but he never found out any more about it.
The morning came,  pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that
a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff.
'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't  I drive?'  he thought, as he usually
did at the beginning of an expedition. 'And all  my  beautiful feather  beds
are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These  tree-roots would  do them good.'
He stretched. 'Wake up, hobbits!' he cried. It's a beautiful morning.'
'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering  over the edge of his
blanket with one eye. 'Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you
got the bath-water hot?'
Sam jumped up,  looking rather  bleary. 'No,  sir, I haven't, sir!'  he
said.
Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and  rolled him  over, and then
walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red out
of the mists that lay thick  on  the world. Touched  with  gold and red  the
autumn trees seemed to  be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared.
When  he returned  Sam  and  Pippin had got a good fire going. 'Water!'
shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?'
'I  don't keep  water in my  pockets,' said  Frodo. 'We thought you had
gone to find  some,' said Pippin, busy  setting out the food, and cups. 'You
had better go now.'
'You  can come too,'  said  Frodo, 'and  bring  all the water-bottles.'
There was  a stream at the foot of the hill. They  filled their  bottles and
the small  camping kettle at a little fall  where the water fell  a few feet
over an outcrop  of grey stone. It  was  icy cold;  and they spluttered  and
puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.
When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again, it
was after  ten o'clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. They
went  down the slope, and across the stream where  it  dived under the road,
and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by
that time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear already seemed
a heavy burden.
The day's march promised to be warm and tiring  work. After some miles,
however, the road  ceased to roll up and  down: it climbed  to the  top of a
steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to  go down
for  the last time. In front of  them they saw  the lower lands  dotted with
small clumps of  trees that melted away in  the distance to a brown woodland
haze. They were looking across the  Woody End towards  the Brandywine
River.
The road wound away before them like a piece of string.
'The road goes on  for ever,' said Pippin; 'but I can't without a rest.
It is  high time for lunch.' He sat down on the bank at the side of the road
and looked  away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end
of the Shire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round
eyes were wide open - for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a
new horizon.
'Do Elves live in those woods?' he asked.
'Not that I ever  heard,' said Pippin.  Frodo  was silent.  He  too was
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it  before. Suddenly
he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with weary feet,
Until it joins some larger way,
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
'That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming,' said Pippin. 'Or is it
one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.'
'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as  if I was making  it
up; but I  may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds  me very much of
Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was
only  one  Road;  that it was like a great river: its  springs were at every
doorstep,  and every path was  its  tributary. "It's  a dangerous  business,
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and
if you don't keep your feet,  there is no knowing where  you might  be swept
off to.  Do you realize  that  this  is the  very  path  that  goes  through
Mirkwood,  and that if you let it, it  might take you to the Lonely Mountain
or  even  further and to worse places?"  He  used to say  that  on  the path
outside the  front door at  Bag End, especially  after he had been out for a
long walk.'
'Well,  the Road won't sweep me  anywhere for an  hour  at least,' said
Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,  putting their
packs against the bank and their  legs out  into the road. After a rest they
had a good lunch, and then more rest.
The sun was beginning to get  low and the light of afternoon was on the
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road.
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little
traffic to  the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour  or
more when Sam  stopped a  moment as  if  listening. They were  now on  level
ground,  and  the  road  after  much  winding  lay  straight  ahead  through
grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.
'I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,' said Sam.
They  looked back, but the turn of the  road prevented them from seeing
far. 'I wonder if that  is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as
he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide
from the view of the rider came over him.
'It  may not matter much,' he  said apologetically, 'but I would rather
not be seen on the  road - by anyone. I am  sick of my  doings being noticed
and discussed. And if  it is Gandalf,' he added as  an afterthought, 'we can
give him  a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out
of sight!'
The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not
far  from the  road. There  they lay  flat. Frodo  hesitated  for  a second:
curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire  to hide. The
sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head
and peered cautiously above one of the great roots.
Round the  corner came  a black horse, no hobbit-pony  but a full-sized
horse;  and  on  it sat  a large man,  who seemed to  crouch in  the saddle,
wrapped in a great black cloak and  hood, so that only his boots in the high
stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and invisible.
When it reached the  tree and was level with Frodo  the  horse stopped.
The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From
