Chapter 9. Flotsam and Jetsam
Gandalf and the King's  company rode away, turning eastward to make the
circuit of the ruined  walls of Isengard.  But  Aragorn, Gimli,  and Legolas
remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to  stray in search of grass, they
came and sat beside the hobbits.
'Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of
us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn.
'And now  that the  great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said
Legolas,  'the hunters  can  perhaps learn the  answers  to  their own small
riddles. We tracked you  as  far  as  the forest, but there  are  still many
things that I should like to know the truth of.'
'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to  know about you ' said
Merry. 'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that
is not nearly enough.'
'All  in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should
give an account of yourselves to us first.'
'Or  second,' said Gimli. 'It would  go better after a meal. t  have  a
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make  amends by finding
us some of the plunder that you spoke  of. Food and drink would pay off some
of my score against you.'
'Then you shall  have  it,' said Pippin.  'Will you have it here, or in
more  comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house--over  there under the
arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.'
'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But  I will not go into  any orc-house
nor touch Orcs' meat or anything that they have mauled.'
'We wouldn't  ask  you  to,' said Merry. 'We have had  enough  of  Orcs
ourselves to last a life-time. But there  were  many other folk in Isengard.
Saruman  kept enough wisdom not  to  trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his
gates:  some of his  most faithful  servants,  I  suppose. Anyway  they were
favoured and got good provisions.'
'And pipe-weed?' asked Gimli.
'No,  I  don't  think  so,' Merry laughed. 'But that  is another story,
which can wait until after lunch.'
'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf.
The hobbits led the way; and they  passed under the arch  and came to a
wide  door upon the  left, at  the  top of a stair. It opened  direct into a
large chamber,  with other smaller  doors  at the far end,  and a hearth and
chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the stone; and it must once
have  been dark, for its windows looked out only into the  tunnel. But light
came in now through the broken roof. On the hearth wood was burning.
'I  lit a  bit of fire,' said Pippin. 'It cheered us up  in  the  fogs.
There were few faggots about, and  most of the  wood we could find was  wet.
But  there  is  a great draught in  the  chimney:  it seems  to wind away up
through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire  is handy.
I  will  make you some toast. The bread is  three  or four days  old,  I  am
afraid.'
Aragorn and his  companions sat  themselves down at  one  end of a long
table,  and  the  hobbits  disappeared  through  one  of  the  inner  doors.
'Store-room  in there,  and above  the woods, luckily,' said Pippin, as they
came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food of various sorts.
'And  you need not  turn up your nose at the provender,  Master Gimli,'
said Merry. 'This is  not orc-stuff, but  man-food, as  Treebeard calls  it.
Will you have wine or beer? There's a barrel  inside there -- very passable.
And this is first-rate salted pork. Or  I can cut you  some rashers of bacon
and  broil them,  if you like.  I am  sorry there  is no  green  stuff:  the
deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer
you  anything  to follow  but butter and  honey  for  your  bread.  Are  you
content?'
'Indeed yes,' said Gimli. 'The score is much reduced.'
The  three  were  soon  busy  with  their meal;  and the  two  hobbits,
unabashed,  set  to  a second time. 'We  must keep our guests company,' they
said.
'You  are full of courtesy this  morning,' laughed Legolas. 'But maybe.
if  we  had  not arrived, you  would already have been keeping  one  another
company again.'
'Maybe; and why not?' said Pippin. 'We had foul fare with the Orcs, and
little enough for days before that. It seems a long while since we could eat
to heart's content.'
'It does not seem to have done you any harm,' said Aragorn. 'Indeed you
look in the bloom of health.'
'Aye, you do indeed,' said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top
of his cup. 'Why,  your hair is twice as thick and curly  as when we parted;
and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for
hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.'
'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents only drink, and drink is not enough
for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing,  but one feels the need
of something solid. And even           lembas    is none the worse for a change.'
'You have drunk of  the waters of the  Ents, have  you?'  said Legolas.
'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange
songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.'
'Many strange tales  have been told about that land,' said Aragorn.  'I
have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the Ents!'
'Ents,'  said Pippin,  'Ents are -- well  Ents are all different for on
thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.' He tried a few fumbling
words that trailed  off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen
some at a distance, already-they saw you  at any rate, and reported that you
were on  the way-and you  will see many others,  I  expect, before you leave
here. You must form your own ideas.'
'Now,  now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story  in the middle.  I
should like a tale in the  right order,  starting with that strange day when
our fellowship was broken.'
'You  shall have it, if there  is time,'  said Merry. 'But first-if you
have finished eating-you shall fill  your pipes and light up. And then for a
little while we can pretend that we are all back safe  at Bree again,  or in
Rivendell.'
He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. 'We have heaps of it,'
he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We  did some
salvage-work  this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things  floating
about. It  was Pippin who found two  small barrels,  washed up  out of  some
cellar  or  store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they  were
filled with this:  as fine a  pipe-weed  as  you could  wish  for, and quite
unspoilt.'
Gimli  took some  and rubbed it in his  palms and sniffed it. 'It feels
good, and it smells good,' he said.
'It is good!' said  Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There
were  the  Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as  plain as plain.  How it
came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew
that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?'
