of his cup. 'Why,  your hair is twice as thick and curly  as when we parted;
and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for
hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.'
'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents only drink, and drink is not enough
for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing,  but one feels the need
of something solid. And even           lembas    is none the worse for a change.'
'You have drunk of  the waters of the  Ents, have  you?'  said Legolas.
'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange
songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.'
'Many strange tales  have been told about that land,' said Aragorn.  'I
have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the Ents!'
'Ents,'  said Pippin,  'Ents are -- well  Ents are all different for on
thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.' He tried a few fumbling
words that trailed  off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen
some at a distance, already-they saw you  at any rate, and reported that you
were on  the way-and you  will see many others,  I  expect, before you leave
here. You must form your own ideas.'
'Now,  now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story  in the middle.  I
should like a tale in the  right order,  starting with that strange day when
our fellowship was broken.'
'You  shall have it, if there  is time,'  said Merry. 'But first-if you
have finished eating-you shall fill  your pipes and light up. And then for a
little while we can pretend that we are all back safe  at Bree again,  or in
Rivendell.'
He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. 'We have heaps of it,'
he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We  did some
salvage-work  this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things  floating
about. It  was Pippin who found two  small barrels,  washed up  out of  some
cellar  or  store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they  were
filled with this:  as fine a  pipe-weed  as  you could  wish  for, and quite
unspoilt.'
Gimli  took some  and rubbed it in his  palms and sniffed it. 'It feels
good, and it smells good,' he said.
'It is good!' said  Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There
were  the  Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as  plain as plain.  How it
came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew
that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?'
'It  would,' said Gimli, 'if I had a pipe to go  with it. Alas, I  lost
mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?'
'No, I am  afraid  not,' said Merry. 'We have  not found any, not  even
here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself. it seems. And I
don't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of  Orthanc  to beg  a
pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.'
'Half a moment!' said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast of his
jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. 'I keep a treasure or
two near my  skin, as precious as  Rings  to  me.  Here's one: my old wooden
pipe.  And  here's another: an unused one. I have carried  it  a  long way,,
though  I don't know why.  I never really expected to find  any pipe-weed on
the journey, when my own ran  out. But now it comes in useful after all.' He
held  up a small  pipe with a wide  flattened bowl, and handed it to  Gimli.
'Does that settle the score between  us?' he said. 'Settle it!' cried Gimli.
'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.'
'Well, I am going back into the  open air, to see what the wind and sky
are doing!' said Legolas.
'We will come with you,' said Aragorn.
They went  out and seated themselves  upon the piled stones before  the
gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists were lifting
and floating away upon the breeze.
'Now let  us take our ease  here for a little!' said Aragorn.  'We will
sit  on the  edge  of  ruin and talk,  as Gandalf  says,  while  he  is busy
elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.' He wrapped
his grey cloak about him, hiding  his mail-shirt, and stretched out his long
legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin stream of smoke.
'Look!' said Pippin. 'Strider the Ranger has come back!'
'He has never been away,' said Aragorn.  'I am Strider and D®nadan too,
and I belong both to Gondor and the North.'
They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting
into the valley from among white clouds high in the West. Legolas lay still,
looking  up at  the  sun and  sky with steady eyes,  and singing  softly  to
himself.  At last he sat  up. 'Come  now!' he said. 'Time  wears on, and the
mists  are  blowing away, or  would  if  you  strange folk did  not  wreathe
yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?'
'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all
strung-up in an orc-camp,' said Pippin. 'Let me see, what is today?'
'The fifth of March  in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made
some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he  said.1 'It seems
a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was like a bad dream, I
reckon that three  very horrible days  followed. Merry will correct me, if I
forget anything important: I am not going into details:  the  whips and  the
filth  and stench  and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he
plunged  into an account of Boromir's last fight and the orc-march from Emyn
Muil to the Forest.  The others  nodded as the various points were fitted in
with their guesses.
'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be
glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak  and took
from it the two sheathed knives.
'Well!' said  Merry. 'I  never expected  to see those again! I marked a
few orcs with mine; but Ugl®k  took them from us. How he glared! At first  I
thought he  was going to  stab me, but he threw the  things away as if  they
burned him.'
'And here also is  your brooch, Pippin,' said Aragorn. 'I have kept  it
safe, for it is a very precious thing.'
'I know,'  said Pippin.  'It was a  wrench  to let it go; but what else
could I do?'
'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away  a treasure
at need is in fetters. You did rightly.'
'The cutting of the bands on your wrists,  that was smart  work!'  said
Gimli. 'Luck  served you there; but you seized your chance with both  hands,
one might say.'
'And set us a  pretty  riddle,' said  Legolas. 'I  wondered  if you had
grown wings!'
'Unfortunately  not,'  said  Pippin.  'But  you  did   not  know  about
Grishnbkh.' He shuddered and said  no more, leaving  Merry to tell of  those
last horrible moments: the  pawing hands, the hot  breath, and  the dreadful
strength of Grishnbkh's hairy arms.
'All this about the  Orcs of Barad-dyr, Lugb®rz as  they call it, makes
me uneasy,' said  Aragorn.  'The  Dark Lord  already knew  too much and  his
servants also; and Grishnbkh  evidently sent some message  across  the River
after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman
at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.'
'Yes, whichever side  wins, his outlook is poor,'  said  Merry. 'Things
