'The fifth of March  in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made
some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he  said.1 'It seems
a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was like a bad dream, I
reckon that three  very horrible days  followed. Merry will correct me, if I
forget anything important: I am not going into details:  the  whips and  the
filth  and stench  and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he
plunged  into an account of Boromir's last fight and the orc-march from Emyn
Muil to the Forest.  The others  nodded as the various points were fitted in
with their guesses.
'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be
glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak  and took
from it the two sheathed knives.
'Well!' said  Merry. 'I  never expected  to see those again! I marked a
few orcs with mine; but Ugl®k  took them from us. How he glared! At first  I
thought he  was going to  stab me, but he threw the  things away as if  they
burned him.'
'And here also is  your brooch, Pippin,' said Aragorn. 'I have kept  it
safe, for it is a very precious thing.'
'I know,'  said Pippin.  'It was a  wrench  to let it go; but what else
could I do?'
'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away  a treasure
at need is in fetters. You did rightly.'
'The cutting of the bands on your wrists,  that was smart  work!'  said
Gimli. 'Luck  served you there; but you seized your chance with both  hands,
one might say.'
'And set us a  pretty  riddle,' said  Legolas. 'I  wondered  if you had
grown wings!'
'Unfortunately  not,'  said  Pippin.  'But  you  did   not  know  about
Grishnbkh.' He shuddered and said  no more, leaving  Merry to tell of  those
last horrible moments: the  pawing hands, the hot  breath, and  the dreadful
strength of Grishnbkh's hairy arms.
'All this about the  Orcs of Barad-dyr, Lugb®rz as  they call it, makes
me uneasy,' said  Aragorn.  'The  Dark Lord  already knew  too much and  his
servants also; and Grishnbkh  evidently sent some message  across  the River
after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman
at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.'
'Yes, whichever side  wins, his outlook is poor,'  said  Merry. 'Things
began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.'
'We caught  a glimpse  of  the old villain, or so Gandalf  hints,' said
Gimli. 'On the edge of the Forest.'
'When was that?' asked Pippin.
'Five nights ago,' said Aragorn.
'Let me see,' said Merry: 'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the
story  you  know nothing  about.  We met  Treebeard that morning  after  the
battle; and that night we were  at Wellinghall,  one of his ent-houses.  The
next  morning  we  went to  Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is,  and  the
queerest thing  I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that  day and the
next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in
the afternoon in the third day of their moot,  the Ents suddenly blew up. It
was amazing. The Forest had  felt as tense as if a  thunderstorm was brewing
inside it: then  all at once  it exploded. I wish you could have heard their
song as they marched.'
'If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even
if he had had to run on his own legs,' said Pippin.
'Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone,
We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door!
There was  very much more. A  great deal  of the song had no words, and
was like a music of horns and drums.  It was very exciting. But I thought it
was only marching music and no more, just a song -- until I got here. I know
better now.'
'We came down  over  the last  ridge  into Nan Curunnr, after night had
fallen,' Merry continued. 'It was then that I first had the feeling that the
Forest itself  was  moving  behind  us. I thought  I was dreaming  an entish
dream, but  Pippin had noticed  it too. We were both frightened; but  we did
not find out more about it until later.
'It  was  the  Huorns,  or so the Ents call them  in "short  language".
Treebeard  won't say much about them,  but  I think they are Ents that  have
become almost  like trees, at least to look at. They stand here and there in
the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees;  but
deep  in the  darkest  dales there  are hundreds and  hundreds  of  them,  I
believe.
'There is a great power in  them, and they seem able to wrap themselves
in shadow: it  is difficult to see  them moving. But  they do. They can move
very quickly, if  they are angry.  You  stand still  looking at the weather,
maybe, or listening to the rustling of  the wind, and then suddenly you find
that  you  are in the middle of a wood with great  groping trees  all around
you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents -- that is why they
are called Huorns, Treebeard says -- but they  have  become queer and  wild.
Dangerous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents
about to look after them.
'Well, in the early night  we crept  down a  long ravine into the upper
end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We
could  not see them, of course,  but the whole air  was full of creaking. It
was very dark, a  cloudy  night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they
had left  the hills,  and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not
appear through the clouds, and not long after midnight there was a tall wood
all round  the north side of Isengard. There was  no  sign of enemies nor of
any  challenge. There was a light gleaming from  a high window in the tower,
that was all.
'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within sight of
the great gates. Pippin  and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's
shoulders, and  I could feel the quivering tenseness  in  him. But even when
they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood still  as
carved stones, breathing and listening.
'Then all at once there was  a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the
walls of Isengard  echoed. We thought that we had  been discovered, and that
battle was  going to  begin. But nothing of  the sort.  All Saruman's people
were marching away. I  don't know much about this war, or about the
Horsemen
of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his
men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I  saw  the  enemy go: endless
lines  of marching Orcs; and troops  of  them mounted on  great wolves.  And
there were battalions of Men, too. Many  of them carried torches, and in the
flare I could see  their faces. Most of them were ordinary men,  rather tall
and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly  evil-looking. But there were
some  others that were  horrible: man-high, but  with goblin-faces,  sallow,
leering,  squint-eyed.  Do  you  know,  they  reminded  me at  once of  that
Southerner at Bree: only he was not  so obviously orc-like as  most of these
were.'
'I  thought of him too,' said Aragorn.  'We had many of these half-orcs
to deal with at Helm's  Deep. It seems plain  now that that Southerner was a
