maybe, or listening to the rustling of  the wind, and then suddenly you find
that  you  are in the middle of a wood with great  groping trees  all around
you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents -- that is why they
are called Huorns, Treebeard says -- but they  have  become queer and  wild.
Dangerous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents
about to look after them.
'Well, in the early night  we crept  down a  long ravine into the upper
end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We
could  not see them, of course,  but the whole air  was full of creaking. It
was very dark, a  cloudy  night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they
had left  the hills,  and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not
appear through the clouds, and not long after midnight there was a tall wood
all round  the north side of Isengard. There was  no  sign of enemies nor of
any  challenge. There was a light gleaming from  a high window in the tower,
that was all.
'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within sight of
the great gates. Pippin  and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's
shoulders, and  I could feel the quivering tenseness  in  him. But even when
they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood still  as
carved stones, breathing and listening.
'Then all at once there was  a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the
walls of Isengard  echoed. We thought that we had  been discovered, and that
battle was  going to  begin. But nothing of  the sort.  All Saruman's people
were marching away. I  don't know much about this war, or about the
Horsemen
of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his
men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I  saw  the  enemy go: endless
lines  of marching Orcs; and troops  of  them mounted on  great wolves.  And
there were battalions of Men, too. Many  of them carried torches, and in the
flare I could see  their faces. Most of them were ordinary men,  rather tall
and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly  evil-looking. But there were
some  others that were  horrible: man-high, but  with goblin-faces,  sallow,
leering,  squint-eyed.  Do  you  know,  they  reminded  me at  once of  that
Southerner at Bree: only he was not  so obviously orc-like as  most of these
were.'
'I  thought of him too,' said Aragorn.  'We had many of these half-orcs
to deal with at Helm's  Deep. It seems plain  now that that Southerner was a
spy of Saruman's; but whether he was working  with the Black Riders,  or for
Saruman alone, I do not know.  It is difficult with these  evil folk to know
when they are in league, and when they are cheating one another.'
'Well, of all sorts together, there must have  been ten thousand at the
very least,' said Merry.  'They took an hour to  pass out of the gates. Some
went off down the highway  to the  Fords, and some turned  away µ  and  went
eastward. A bridge has  been built down there, about  a mile away, where the
river  runs in a very deep channel. You could see it  now, if  you stood up.
They were all singing with harsh voices, and laughing, making a hideous din.
I thought things looked very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He
said: 'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.'
'But, though I could not see what was happening  in the dark, I believe
that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were shut again. Their
business  was with Orcs I think.  They  were  far  down  the valley  in  the
morning; or any rate there was a shadow there that one couldn't see through.
'As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came. Treebeard
put us down, and went up to the gates, and began hammering on the doors, and
calling for Saruman. There was no answer, except arrows  and stones from the
walls. But arrows are no  use against Ents. They hurt  them, of  course, and
infuriate them:  like stinging flies. But an  Ent  can  be  stuck as full of
orc-arrows  as  a pin-cushion,  and take no serious  harm.  They  cannot  be
poisoned,  for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher
than bark.  It takes a  very  heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They
don't like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe-men to one Ent:
a man  that hacks once at  an  Ent  never  gets a chance of a second blow. A
punch from an Ent-fist crumples up iron like thin tin.
'When Treebeard had got a few  arrows  in  him, he began to warm up, to
get positively "hasty", as he would say. He let  out a great               hoom-hom      , and a
dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent is terrifying. Their fingers,
and  their toes,  just  freeze  on  to  rock;  and  they  tear  it  up  like
bread-crust. It was like watching the work of  great tree-roots in a hundred
years, all packed into a few moments.
'They pushed,  pulled,  tore,  shook,  and  hammered;  and                 clang-bang     ,
crash-crack     ,  in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in  ruin;
and  some were  already beginning to eat into  the walls,  like rabbits in a
sand-pit. I don't know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he
did
not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately,
of course;  but anyway  I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage
alone in a tight place without a lot of  slaves and machines  and things, if
you  know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame
was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.'
'No,'  said  Aragorn. 'Once he was as  great as his fame made him.  His
knowledge  was deep,  his thought  was  subtle,  and his hands  marvellously
skilled; and  he  had  a power  over the  minds of others. The wise he could
persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still
keeps. There are not  many in Middle-earth that I  should  say were safe, if
they were  left  alone to talk with him,  even now  when he  has suffered  a
defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has
been laid bare, but very few others.'
'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems  at one  time to  have  got
round them, but never again. And anyway  he did  not understand them; and he
made  the great mistake of  leaving them out of his  calculations. He had no
plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work.
As  soon  as  our  attack began,  the few remaining rats in Isengard started
bolting through  every  hole that the Ents  made.  The Ents  let the Men go,
after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down  at this end. I
don't think many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not  from the Huorns: there
was a wood  full of them all round Isengard by  that time, as well as  those
that had gone down the valley.
'When  the  Ents  had reduced a large part  of  the  southern walls  to
rubbish,  and  what was  left of his people  had  bolted  and  deserted him,
Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived:
I expect he came  to watch his splendid army march out. When the  Ents broke
their  way in,  he  left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the
night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for
Ents to see by,  and suddenly  Quickbeam  gave a  cry  "The tree-killer, the
tree-killer!"  Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he  hates Saruman all the
more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He  leapt
down the path from the inner gate, and he  can  move like a wind when  he is
roused. There was a pale figure hurrying away  in and out of the  shadows of
the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs  to the tower-door. But it
was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after  him, that he was within a step
or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door.
