not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately,
of course;  but anyway  I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage
alone in a tight place without a lot of  slaves and machines  and things, if
you  know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame
was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.'
'No,'  said  Aragorn. 'Once he was as  great as his fame made him.  His
knowledge  was deep,  his thought  was  subtle,  and his hands  marvellously
skilled; and  he  had  a power  over the  minds of others. The wise he could
persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still
keeps. There are not  many in Middle-earth that I  should  say were safe, if
they were  left  alone to talk with him,  even now  when he  has suffered  a
defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has
been laid bare, but very few others.'
'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems  at one  time to  have  got
round them, but never again. And anyway  he did  not understand them; and he
made  the great mistake of  leaving them out of his  calculations. He had no
plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work.
As  soon  as  our  attack began,  the few remaining rats in Isengard started
bolting through  every  hole that the Ents  made.  The Ents  let the Men go,
after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down  at this end. I
don't think many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not  from the Huorns: there
was a wood  full of them all round Isengard by  that time, as well as  those
that had gone down the valley.
'When  the  Ents  had reduced a large part  of  the  southern walls  to
rubbish,  and  what was  left of his people  had  bolted  and  deserted him,
Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived:
I expect he came  to watch his splendid army march out. When the  Ents broke
their  way in,  he  left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the
night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for
Ents to see by,  and suddenly  Quickbeam  gave a  cry  "The tree-killer, the
tree-killer!"  Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he  hates Saruman all the
more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He  leapt
down the path from the inner gate, and he  can  move like a wind when  he is
roused. There was a pale figure hurrying away  in and out of the  shadows of
the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs  to the tower-door. But it
was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after  him, that he was within a step
or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door.
'When Saruman  was  safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set
some of  his precious machinery to work. By  that time there were  many Ents
inside  Isengard: some  had followed Quickbeam, and others had burst in from
the  north  and  east; they were roaming  about and  doing a great  deal  of
damage. Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes: the vents and shafts all over
the  plain began to spout  and belch. Several of the Ents  got scorched  and
blistered.  One of them,  Beechbone  I  think he was  called,  a  very  tall
handsome Ent,  got caught in a spray of some  liquid fire and burned like  a
torch: a horrible sight.
'That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before;
but  I  was wrong. I saw  what it was like at last.  It was staggering. They
roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to crack and fall at the
mere noise of them. Merry  and  I lay on  the  ground and stuffed our cloaks
into our ears. Round  and  round the  rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding
and  storming like a howling gale, breaking pillars,  hurling avalanches  of
boulders  down the shafts, tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air  like
leaves.  The tower was in the  middle  of a spinning  whirlwind. I  saw iron
posts  and blocks of  masonry go rocketing  up hundreds  of feet, and  smash
against the windows  of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had
any burns, luckily. He  did not want  his  folk to hurt themselves in  their
fury,  and  he  did  not  want  Saruman to  escape out of some hole  in  the
confusion.   Many  of  the   Ents   were   hurling  themselves  against  the
Orthanc-rock;  but that defeated  them.  It  is very  smooth  and hard. Some
wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than  Saruman's.  Anyway they
could  not get a grip on it, or make a crack in  it; and they  were bruising
and wounding themselves against it. 'So Treebeard went out into the ring and
shouted.  His  enormous voice  rose above  all the din.  There  was  a  dead
silence, suddenly. In it we  heard a shrill  laugh from a high window in the
tower.  That had a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now
they became cold, grim as  ice, and quiet.  They left the plain and gathered
round Treebeard,  standing quite still.  He  spoke  to  them for a little in
their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had made in his
old head long before. Then they just faded silently away in  the grey light.
Day was dawning by that time.
'They set a  watch on the tower,  I believe,  but  the watchers were so
well hidden in  shadows  and kept so  still, that  I could not see them. The
others went away north. All  that day they were busy, out of  sight. Most of
the time  we were left  alone. It  was a dreary day; and we wandered about a
bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we
could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time  we spent
looking for something to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was
happening away south in Rohan,  and what had  become of all the rest  of our
Company. Every  now  and  then we could hear in the distance the rattle  and
fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.
'In the afternoon we walked round the circle,  and went  to have a look
at what was going on. There was  a great shadowy  wood of Huorns at the head
of the  valley, and  another round the northern wall. We  did not dare to go
in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and
Huorns were  digging great  pits  and  trenches, and making  great pools and
dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream
that they could find. We left them to it.
'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and booming to
himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched  his great arms and legs
and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired.
' "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well  no, not tired, but stiff.  I  need  a
good  draught  of  Entwash.  We  have   worked  hard;   we  have  done  more
stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long
year
before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not  linger near this
gate or in the  old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be foul water
for a while, until all the filth  of Saruman  is washed away. Then  Isen can
run clean  again." He began  to pull  down  a bit  more of  the walls,  in a
leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself.
'We were just  wondering where  it  would  be  safe to lie and get some
sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a
rider coming swiftly  up the road. Merry  and I lay quiet, and Treebeard hid
himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly  a great horse came striding
up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark. but I could see the rider's
face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat
up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't.
'There  was no  need.  He  halted  just by  us and looked down  at  us.
'Gandalf!' I said  at last.  but my voice  was only  a whisper. Did he  say:
"Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!"? No, indeed! He said: "Get up,
you tom-fool  of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in  all  this ruin is
