the time  we were left  alone. It  was a dreary day; and we wandered about a
bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we
could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time  we spent
looking for something to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was
happening away south in Rohan,  and what had  become of all the rest  of our
Company. Every  now  and  then we could hear in the distance the rattle  and
fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.
'In the afternoon we walked round the circle,  and went  to have a look
at what was going on. There was  a great shadowy  wood of Huorns at the head
of the  valley, and  another round the northern wall. We  did not dare to go
in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and
Huorns were  digging great  pits  and  trenches, and making  great pools and
dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream
that they could find. We left them to it.
'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and booming to
himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched  his great arms and legs
and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired.
' "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well  no, not tired, but stiff.  I  need  a
good  draught  of  Entwash.  We  have   worked  hard;   we  have  done  more
stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long
year
before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not  linger near this
gate or in the  old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be foul water
for a while, until all the filth  of Saruman  is washed away. Then  Isen can
run clean  again." He began  to pull  down  a bit  more of  the walls,  in a
leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself.
'We were just  wondering where  it  would  be  safe to lie and get some
sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a
rider coming swiftly  up the road. Merry  and I lay quiet, and Treebeard hid
himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly  a great horse came striding
up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark. but I could see the rider's
face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat
up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't.
'There  was no  need.  He  halted  just by  us and looked down  at  us.
'Gandalf!' I said  at last.  but my voice  was only  a whisper. Did he  say:
"Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!"? No, indeed! He said: "Get up,
you tom-fool  of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in  all  this ruin is
Treebeard? I want him. Quick!"
'Treebeard heard his voice  and  came out of the shadows  at once;  and
there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed
surprised at all.  Gandalf obviously  expected to find  Treebeard  here; and
Treebeard  might almost have been loitering about near the  gates on purpose
to  meet  him. Yet we  had  told  the old  Ent all  about  Moria. But then I
remembered a queer look he gave us  at the time. I can only suppose that  he
had  seen Gandalf or  had some  news of him, but would not say anything in a
hurry. "Don't  be hasty" is  his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say
much about Gandalf's movements when he is not there.
'"Hoom! Gandalf!" said Treebeard.  "I am  glad  you have come. Wood and
water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here."
'"Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I need your help. You have done much,  but
I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage."
'Then those two went off and had a council  together in some corner. It
must have seemed very  hasty  to  Treebeard, for Gandalf was in a tremendous
hurry, and was already talking  at a great  pace,  before they passed out of
hearing.  They were only away a matter of minutes, perhaps  a quarter  of an
hour. Then Gandalf came back to us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He
did say he was glad to see us, then.
'"But Gandalf," I cried, "where have you  been?  And have you seen  the
others?"
'"Wherever I have been, I am back,"  he answered in the genuine Gandalf
manner. "Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait.  This is a
perilous night,  and I  must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if
so, we shall  meet  again.  Take  care  of  yourselves,  and keep away  from
Orthanc! Good-bye!"
'Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently
learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked at us and said:
"Hm, well, I find you are not such  hasty  folk as I thought. You  said much
less than you might, and  not more than you should. Hm, this is  a bundle of
news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again."
'Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it  did not cheer
us  up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you three than about
Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we gathered that there was a great
battle going on, or soon would be, and that  you were in it, and might never
come out of it.
'"Huorns will help,"  said Treebeard. Then he went  away and we did not
see him again until this morning.
'It was deep night. We lay  on  top of a pile  of stone,  and could see
nothing beyond  it.  Mist  or shadows  blotted out  everything like  a great
blanket  all  round us. The air seemed hot and  heavy; and it  was  full  of
rustlings,  creakings,  and  a  murmur  like voices  passing. I  think  that
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle.
Later  there was  a  great  rumble  of  thunder away south, and  flashes  of
lightning   far  away  across  Rohan.  Every  now  and  then  we  could  see
mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab  out suddenly,  black  and white,
and then vanish. And behind us there were  noises like thunder in hills, but
different. At times the whole valley echoed.
'It  must have been  about midnight when  the Ents broke  the  dams and
poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into
Isengard. The  Huorn-dark had passed,  and the  thunder had rolled away. The
Moon was sinking behind the western mountains.
'Isengard began to fill up with black  creeping streams and pools. They
glittered  in the  last  light of the Moon,  as  they spread over the plain.
Every now and  then the waters  found their  way down  into  some  shaft  or
spouthole. Great  white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows.  There were
explosions and gusts  of fire. One great  coil of  vapour  went whirling up,
twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud,
fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at
last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.'
'We saw  a cloud of smoke and steam from  the  south last night when we
came to the mouth of Nan Curunnr,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman
was
brewing some new devilry for us.'
'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably  choking and  not laughing  any
more. By  the morning, yesterday morning, the water  had sunk down  into all
the holes,  and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over
there; and we had  rather a fright. The lake began  to overflow and pour out
through the old  tunnel,  and the  water was rapidly rising up the steps. We
thought we were  going to get caught  like  Orcs in a  hole; but we  found a
winding stair at the back of  the  store-room that brought  us out on top of
the arch. It was a squeeze to get  out, as the passages had been cracked and
half blocked with fallen stone near the top. There  we sat high up above the
