'"Huorns will help,"  said Treebeard. Then he went  away and we did not
see him again until this morning.
'It was deep night. We lay  on  top of a pile  of stone,  and could see
nothing beyond  it.  Mist  or shadows  blotted out  everything like  a great
blanket  all  round us. The air seemed hot and  heavy; and it  was  full  of
rustlings,  creakings,  and  a  murmur  like voices  passing. I  think  that
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle.
Later  there was  a  great  rumble  of  thunder away south, and  flashes  of
lightning   far  away  across  Rohan.  Every  now  and  then  we  could  see
mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab  out suddenly,  black  and white,
and then vanish. And behind us there were  noises like thunder in hills, but
different. At times the whole valley echoed.
'It  must have been  about midnight when  the Ents broke  the  dams and
poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into
Isengard. The  Huorn-dark had passed,  and the  thunder had rolled away. The
Moon was sinking behind the western mountains.
'Isengard began to fill up with black  creeping streams and pools. They
glittered  in the  last  light of the Moon,  as  they spread over the plain.
Every now and  then the waters  found their  way down  into  some  shaft  or
spouthole. Great  white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows.  There were
explosions and gusts  of fire. One great  coil of  vapour  went whirling up,
twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud,
fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at
last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.'
'We saw  a cloud of smoke and steam from  the  south last night when we
came to the mouth of Nan Curunnr,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman
was
brewing some new devilry for us.'
'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably  choking and  not laughing  any
more. By  the morning, yesterday morning, the water  had sunk down  into all
the holes,  and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over
there; and we had  rather a fright. The lake began  to overflow and pour out
through the old  tunnel,  and the  water was rapidly rising up the steps. We
thought we were  going to get caught  like  Orcs in a  hole; but we  found a
winding stair at the back of  the  store-room that brought  us out on top of
the arch. It was a squeeze to get  out, as the passages had been cracked and
half blocked with fallen stone near the top. There  we sat high up above the
floods  and watched the drowning of Isengard. The  Ents kept  on pouring  in
more water, till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled. The fogs
slowly gathered together  and steamed up into  a huge umbrella of  cloud: it
must have been  a mile high. In the evening there  was a great rainbow  over
the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on
the mountain-sides. It  all went very quiet. A few wolves howled mournfully,
far away. The Ents stopped the  inflow in the  night, and sent the Isen back
into its old course. And that was the end of it all.
'Since then  the water has  been sinking  again. There  must be outlets
somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of
his  windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We  felt very lonely. Not
even  a visible Ent  to talk to in all the ruin;  and no  news. We spent the
night up on top there above the arch,  and it was cold and  damp and we  did
not sleep.  We  had a feeling  that anything  might  happen  at  any minute.
Saruman  is  still in his tower. There was a noise in the  night like a wind
coming  up the valley. I think the Ents  and Huorns that had been away  came
back  then; but where they have all gone to  now, I  don't  know. It  was  a
misty,  moisty morning  when we  climbed down  and  looked  round again,
and
nobody was about. And that is  about all there  is  to tell. It seems almost
peaceful  now after all  the turmoil. And safer too, somehow,  since Gandalf
came back. I could sleep!'
They  all fell silent  for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. 'There is
one thing I wonder about,' he  said as he lit it with his  flint and tinder:
'Wormtongue. You told Thjoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?'
'Oh yes,  I forgot about him,'  said Pippin. 'He did not get here  till
this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard
appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our names outside.
'"I have just come round to see how  you are faring, my lads,' he said;
'and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; aye very well
indeed!" he laughed, and slapped his  thighs. "No more Orcs  in Isengard, no
more axes! And there will be folk coming up from the South before the day is
old; some that you may be glad to see."
'He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road.
We rushed out  before the gates, and  I stood and stared,  half expecting to
see Strider  and Gandalf come riding up at the head of  an army. But  out of
the  mist there  rode a man on  an old tired  horse; and he  looked  a queer
twisted sort of creature  himself. There was no one  else. When he came. out
of the  mist and suddenly saw  all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he
sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that  he
did not seem to notice us at first. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to
turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put out
a long  arm, and  lifted him out  of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror,
and he grovelled  on the ground. He said he was Grnma, friend and counsellor
of  the  king,  and had  been sent  with important messages  from Thjoden to
Saruman.
'"No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul
Orcs," he said,  "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am
hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves."
'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself
"liar".  Treebeard looked at him in  his long slow  way for several minutes,
till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: "Ha,
hm, I was expecting  you, Master Wormtongue." The man  started at that name.
"Gandalf got  here first. So I know as much about you  as I need, and I know
what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will.
I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of."
'"Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way."
'"You knew the way, I  don't doubt,"  said Treebeard. "But  things have
changed here a little. Go and see!"
'He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close
behind, until he came inside  the ring and could see all the floods that lay
between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us.
'"Let me go away!" he whined. "Let  me go away! My messages are useless
now."
'"They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two  choices: to
stay  with me until  Gandalf and your master arrive; or to  cross the water.
Which will you have?"
'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the
water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said.
'"The  water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty,  but that will
not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!"
'With that the wretch  floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly
to his neck before  he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of
