twisted sort of creature  himself. There was no one  else. When he came. out
of the  mist and suddenly saw  all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he
sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that  he
did not seem to notice us at first. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to
turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put out
a long  arm, and  lifted him out  of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror,
and he grovelled  on the ground. He said he was Grnma, friend and counsellor
of  the  king,  and had  been sent  with important messages  from Thjoden to
Saruman.
'"No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul
Orcs," he said,  "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am
hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves."
'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself
"liar".  Treebeard looked at him in  his long slow  way for several minutes,
till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: "Ha,
hm, I was expecting  you, Master Wormtongue." The man  started at that name.
"Gandalf got  here first. So I know as much about you  as I need, and I know
what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will.
I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of."
'"Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way."
'"You knew the way, I  don't doubt,"  said Treebeard. "But  things have
changed here a little. Go and see!"
'He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close
behind, until he came inside  the ring and could see all the floods that lay
between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us.
'"Let me go away!" he whined. "Let  me go away! My messages are useless
now."
'"They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two  choices: to
stay  with me until  Gandalf and your master arrive; or to  cross the water.
Which will you have?"
'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the
water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said.
'"The  water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty,  but that will
not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!"
'With that the wretch  floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly
to his neck before  he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of
him was clinging to some old barrel or  piece of  wood. But  Treebeard waded
after him, and watched his progress.
'"Well, he has gone in," he said when he returned. "I saw  him crawling
up  the steps like a draggled  rat. There is someone  in  the tower still: a
hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and I  hope  the welcome is
to  his liking. Now  I  must go and wash myself clean  of the slime. I'll be
away  up on the north side,  if anyone wants to see  me. There  is no  clean
water down here  fit for an  Ent to drink. or to bathe in. So I will ask you
two lads to keep a watch at  the gate for the folk that are coming. There'll
be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan, mark you! You must welcome  him as  well
as you know how: his men have fought a great fight with the Orcs. Maybe, you
know the right fashion  of Men's words  for such a  lord,  better than Ents.
There have been many  lords in the green fields in my time, and I have never
learned their speech or their  names. They will be wanting man-food, and you
know all  about that, I guess.  So find what you think  is fit for a king to
eat,  if you can." And that is the end of the story. Though I should like to
know who this Wormtongue is. Was he really the king's counsellor?'
'He was,' said  Aragorn; 'and also  Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan.
Fate has not been  kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the  ruin of
all  that  he  thought  so  strong and  magnificent  must  have  been almost
punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.'
'Yes, I  don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of  kindness,'
said Merry.  'He seemed rather grimly delighted  with the business  and  was
laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe and drink. We spent a busy
time after that, searching the flotsam, and rummaging about. We found two or
three  store-rooms  in different  places nearby,  above the flood-level. But
Treebeard  sent  some  Ents down, and they  carried off  a great deal of the
stuff.
'"We want man-food for twenty-five," the Ents said, so you can see that
somebody  had  counted your  company carefully before you arrived. You three
were  evidently meant to go  with the  great people. But you would  not have
fared any better. We kept as good as we sent, I promise you. Better, because
we sent no drink.
'"What about drink?" I said to the Ents.
'"There is water of Isen," they said, "and that is good enough for Ents
and Men." But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of their
draughts from the mountain-springs, and we shall see Gandalf's beard curling
when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired,  and hungry. But we
did not grumble  -- our labours  had  been well rewarded. It was through our
search  for  man-food that Pippin  discovered the prize of  all the flotsam,
those  Hornblower  barrels.  "Pipe-weed  is better after food," said Pippin;
that is how the situation arose.'
'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli.
'All except one thing,' said  Aragorn: 'leaf  from the Southfarthing in
Isengard.  The more  I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never
been in Isengard,  but I have journeyed  in this  land, and I know  well the
empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk
have passed that  way for  many a long year, not openly. Saruman  had secret
dealings with someone  in  the Shire, I  guess. Wormtongues may  be found in
other houses than King Thjoden's. Was there a date on the barrels?'
'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the
year before, of course, now: a good year.'
'Ah well, whatever evil  was  afoot is over now, I  hope; or else it is
beyond our reach  at present,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it
to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.'
'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The  afternoon is getting on.
Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at  any rate,  Strider,
if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.'
