when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired,  and hungry. But we
did not grumble  -- our labours  had  been well rewarded. It was through our
search  for  man-food that Pippin  discovered the prize of  all the flotsam,
those  Hornblower  barrels.  "Pipe-weed  is better after food," said Pippin;
that is how the situation arose.'
'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli.
'All except one thing,' said  Aragorn: 'leaf  from the Southfarthing in
Isengard.  The more  I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never
been in Isengard,  but I have journeyed  in this  land, and I know  well the
empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk
have passed that  way for  many a long year, not openly. Saruman  had secret
dealings with someone  in  the Shire, I  guess. Wormtongues may  be found in
other houses than King Thjoden's. Was there a date on the barrels?'
'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the
year before, of course, now: a good year.'
'Ah well, whatever evil  was  afoot is over now, I  hope; or else it is
beyond our reach  at present,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it
to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.'
'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The  afternoon is getting on.
Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at  any rate,  Strider,
if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.'
Chapter 10. The Voice of Saruman
They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of  stones,
gazing at the  dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a menace still in
the  desolation  that  lay  all about  it.  The waters  had  now  nearly all
subsided.  Here  and  there  gloomy pools  remained,  covered with  scum and
wreckage; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a  wilderness of slime
and tumbled  rock, pitted with  blackened holes, and  dotted  with posts and
pillars  leaning  drunkenly this  way and that. At the rim of the  shattered
bowl  there lay vast mounds and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great
storm; and  beyond them the  green and  tangled valley  ran up into the long
ravine  between the  dark arms  of  the mountains. Across the waste they saw
riders picking their way; they were coming from the north  side, and already
they were drawing near to Orthanc.
'There is  Gandalf, and Thjoden and his men!' said Legolas. 'Let  us go
and meet them!'
'Walk warily!' said Merry. 'There are loose  slabs that may tilt up and
throw you down into a pit, if you don't take care.'
They  followed what was  left of  the road from  the gates  to Orthanc,
going slowly,  for  the flag-stones  were cracked  and  slimed.  The riders,
seeing them approach, halted under the  shadow of  the  rock and  waited for
them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them.
'Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting  discussions, and made
a few plans,' he said; 'and we have  all had  some much-needed  rest. Now we
must  be going  on again.  I hope  you companions  have all rested, too, and
refreshed yourselves?'
'We have,' said Merry. 'But  our discussions began and ended in  smoke.
Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.'
'Do you indeed?' said Gandalf.  'Well, I do not. I have now a last task
to do  before I  go: I must pay Saruman  a  farewell visit.  Dangerous,  and
probably  useless; but it must be done.  Those of you who wish may come with
me -- but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.'
'I will  come,' said Gimli. 'I wish to see him and  learn  if he really
looks like you.'
'And how will you learn  that,  Master Dwarf?'  said  Gandalf. 'Saruman
could  look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are
you yet wise enough  to detect  all  his  counterfeits? Well, we shall  see,
perhaps.  He  may  be  shy  of  showing himself before many  different  eyes
together. But I have ordered all  the Ents to remove  themselves from sight,
so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.'
'What's the danger?' asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at  us, and pour fire
out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?'
'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light  heart,'
said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try.
A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do
not guess. Beware of his voice!'
They  came  now to  the foot of Orthanc.  It  was black, and  the  rock
gleamed as if it were wet. The  many  faces of the  stone had sharp edges as
though they had been newly chiselled. A  few  scorings. and small flake-like
splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury  of the
Ents.
On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door,
high above the  ground; and over it was a  shuttered window, opening upon  a
balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold of the door there mounted
a flight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn  by some unknown art of the same
black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower;  but many tall windows
were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like
little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns.
At the  foot of the  stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go
up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.'
'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any
more.  I wish to speak with the enemy who has  done me so  much wrong.
Jomer
shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.'
'As you  will,' said  Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall  come with  me.  Let  the
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if
there is anything to hear or see.'
'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here
represent our kindred. We also will come behind.'
'Come  then!' said Gandalf, and  with that  he climbed the  steps,  and
Thjoden went beside him.
The Riders of Rohan sat  uneasily upon their horses,  on either side of
