could  look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are
you yet wise enough  to detect  all  his  counterfeits? Well, we shall  see,
perhaps.  He  may  be  shy  of  showing himself before many  different  eyes
together. But I have ordered all  the Ents to remove  themselves from sight,
so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.'
'What's the danger?' asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at  us, and pour fire
out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?'
'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light  heart,'
said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try.
A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do
not guess. Beware of his voice!'
They  came  now to  the foot of Orthanc.  It  was black, and  the  rock
gleamed as if it were wet. The  many  faces of the  stone had sharp edges as
though they had been newly chiselled. A  few  scorings. and small flake-like
splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury  of the
Ents.
On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door,
high above the  ground; and over it was a  shuttered window, opening upon  a
balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold of the door there mounted
a flight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn  by some unknown art of the same
black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower;  but many tall windows
were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like
little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns.
At the  foot of the  stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go
up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.'
'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any
more.  I wish to speak with the enemy who has  done me so  much wrong.
Jomer
shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.'
'As you  will,' said  Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall  come with  me.  Let  the
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if
there is anything to hear or see.'
'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here
represent our kindred. We also will come behind.'
'Come  then!' said Gandalf, and  with that  he climbed the  steps,  and
Thjoden went beside him.
The Riders of Rohan sat  uneasily upon their horses,  on either side of
the stair,  and  looked  up darkly  at  the great  tower, fearing what might
befall their lord.  Merry and  Pippin  sat on the bottom step,  feeling both
unimportant and unsafe.
'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!' muttered Pippin.  'I wish I
could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are
not wanted.'
Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his staff.
It  rang  with  a  hollow  sound.  'Saruman, Saruman!'  he  cried in a  loud
commanding voice. 'Saruman come forth!'
For  some time there was no answer.  At  last the window above the door
was unbarred, hut no figure could be seen at its dark opening.
'Who is it?' said a voice. 'What do you wish?'
Thjoden started.  'I know that  voice,' he said, 'and I  curse  the day
when I first listened to it.'
'Go  and  fetch Saruman,  since  you  have  become  his footman,  Grnma
Wormtongue!' said Gandalf. 'And do not waste our time!'
The window closed. They  waited.  Suddenly another voice spoke, low and
melodious, its very sound  an enchantment.  Those who  listened  unwarily to
that voice could seldom  report the words that they heard;  and if they did,
they wondered,  for  little power remained  in them. Mostly they  remembered
only that it was a delight to  hear the  voice  speaking, all  that it  said
seemed wise and  reasonable, and desire awoke in them  by swift agreement to
seem  wise themselves.  When others  spoke  they seemed harsh and uncouth
by
contrast; and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of
those under the spell. Fur some the spell lasted only while the voice  spoke
to them, and when it spake to another they smiled, as men do who see through
a  juggler's trick while others gape at it. For many the sound  of the voice
alone was enough  to hold  them enthralled; but for those whom it  conquered
the  spell endured when they were  far away. and ever  they heard that  soft
voice whispering and  urging them. But none  were unmoved; none rejected its
pleas and its commands without  an effort  of mind and will, so long as  its
master had control of it.
'Well?' it  said now with  gentle  question. 'Why  must  you disturb my
rest? Will you give me no peace  at  all by night or day?' Its tone was that
of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved.
They  looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his coming;
and they saw a figure standing at the  rail, looking  down upon them: an old
man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for
it changed if they  moved  their eyes or if  he stirred. His  face was long,
with  a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to fathom, though the
look  that they now  bore was grave and benevolent, and a  little weary. His
hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his  lips
and ears.
'Like, and yet unlike,' muttered Gimli.
'But come now,' said the  soft voice. 'Two  at least of  you I know  by
name.  Gandalf  I know too  well to  have much  hope that  he seeks help  or
counsel here. But you, Thjoden Lord  of  the Mark  of Rohan are  declared by
your noble devices, and still more by  the fair  countenance of the House of
Eorl.  O worthy son of  Thengel the  Thrice-renowned! Why have you not
come
before, and as a friend? Much  have  I desired to see you, mightiest king of
western lands, and especially  in these latter years, to  save you from  the
unwise and evil counsels that beset  you!  Is it yet  too late? Despite  the
injuries that have been done to me, in  which the  men of Rohan, alas!  have
had some part, still  I  would save you, and deliver you from the ruin  that
draws nigh inevitably,  if you  ride  upon this  road which you have  taken.
Indeed I alone can aid you now.'
Thjoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked
up  at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and
then to Gandalf at his  side; and  he  seemed to hesitate. Gandalf  made  no
sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that
has not  yet  come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval  of
the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent,  as men spell-bound. It
seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so  fair and fittingly to their
lord.  Rough and proud  now seemed all his  dealings with  Thjoden. And over
their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark
in a  darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while Saruman stood beside
a door of  escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through.
There was a heavy silence.
It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. 'The words of this wizard
stand on their heads,'  he growled, gripping  the handle of his axe. 'In the
language  of  Orthanc  help  means ruin, and  saving means  slaying, that is
plain. But we do not come here to beg.'
