they do things proper at Bag End. Our  Sam says that                  everyone's    going to be
invited to the party, and there's  going to be presents, mark you,  presents
for all - this very month as is.'
That very month  was  September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or
two  later a rumour (probably  started by the knowledgeable Sam)  was spread
about  that there were going to be fireworks - fireworks, what is more, such
as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh  on a  century, not indeed  since
the Old Took died.
Days passed  and The Day drew nearer.  An odd-looking waggon laden with
odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill
to  Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it.
It was driven  by outlandish  folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End.  At the end of the
second week in September a cart came in  through Bywater from the  direction
of the  Brandywine Bridge in  broad daylight. An old  man was driving it all
alone.  He  wore a tall pointed blue hat,  a  long grey cloak,  and a silver
scarf. He  had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows  that stuck  out beyond
the  brim of  his  hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great
bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red
G and the elf-rune, .
That was Gandalf's mark, of course,  and the  old man  was Gandalf  the
Wizard,  whose  fame in the Shire  was  due mainly to  his skill with fires,
smokes, and lights.  His real business was far more difficult and dangerous,
but  the Shire-folk knew nothing about  it. To them  he was just one  of the
'attractions'  at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. 'G
for Grand!' they  shouted, and the old man smiled.  They knew him by  sight,
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but
neither they nor  any  but  the  oldest of  their elders had seen one of his
firework displays - they now belonged to the legendary past.
When the old  man,  helped by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves,  had finished
unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or  cracker
was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.
'Run  away now!' said  Gandalf.  'You  will  get plenty  when  the time
comes.' Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door  was  shut.  The
young  hobbits  stared at  the door  in vain for a while, and then made off,
feeling that the day of the party would never come.
Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window  of a
small room looking out west on to the garden.  The late afternoon was bright
and   peaceful.  The  flowers  glowed   red  and  golden:  snap-dragons  and
sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in
at the round windows.
'How bright your garden looks!' said Gandalf.
'Yes,' said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old
Shire; but I think I need a holiday.'
'You mean to go on with your plan then?'
'I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven't changed it.'
'Very  well.  It is no good saying any  more. Stick to your plan - your
whole plan, mind  - and I hope it will turn out for the best, for  you,  and
for all of us.'
'I hope  so.  Anyway  I mean to enjoy  myself on Thursday, and  have my
little joke.'
'Who will laugh, I wonder?' said Gandalf, shaking his head.
'We shall see,' said Bilbo.
The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts. There
might have  been  some grumbling about 'dealing locally', but that very week
orders began to pour out of Bag End for every  kind of provision, commodity,
or luxury  that  could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the
neighbourhood.  People  became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off  the
days on  the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the  postman, hoping for
invitations.
Before long  the  invitations  began  pouring  out,  and  the  Hobbiton
post-office  was blocked, and the Bywater post-office  was snowed under, and
voluntary assistant postmen were called for.  There was a constant stream of
them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on                   Thank you,
I shall certainly come.
A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT
ON PARTY
BUSINESS. Even those  who had, or  pretended  to  have  Party  Business were
seldom allowed inside. Bilbo  was  busy:  writing invitations,  ticking  off
answers, packing up presents, and making  some  private preparations  of his
own. From the time of Gandalf's arrival he remained hidden from view.
One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field,  south of Bilbo's
front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents  and pavilions. A special
entrance  was cut into the bank leading to  the road, and wide steps  and  a
large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,
adjoining the field, were intensely  interested  and  generally envied.  Old
Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden.
The tents began to  go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big
that the tree that grew in the  field was right inside it, and stood proudly
near one end, at the head of  the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its
branches. More  promising still (to the hobbits' mind): an enormous open-air
kitchen was erected in the  north corner of  the field. A draught  of cooks,
from every inn and eating-house  for miles around, arrived to supplement the
dwarves and other odd  folk  that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose
to its height.
Then the weather  clouded  over.  That was on Wednesday the  eve of the
Party.  Anxiety was  intense. Then Thursday,  September  the 22nd,  actually
dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun
began.
Bilbo  Baggins called it  a       party,   but it  was really  a  variety  of
entertainments  rolled  into one.  Practically  everybody  living  near  was
invited. A very few were overlooked  by accident, but  as they turned up all
the same, that did not matter.  Many people  from other parts of  the  Shire
were also asked; and there were even  a few from outside the  borders. Bilbo
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. He gave away
presents to all and sundry - the latter were  those  who went out again by a
back way  and came  in  again by  the gate. Hobbits give  presents  to other
people  on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a  rule, and not
so lavishly  as on this  occasion; but it was  not a bad system. Actually in
Hobbiton  and Bywater every  day in the year it was somebody's  birthday, so
that every  hobbit  in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present
at least once a week. But they never got tired of them.
On this occasion the presents were unusually  good. The hobbit-children
were so excited that for a while they almost forgot about eating. There were
toys the like  of which they had  never seen before, all beautiful and  some
obviously magical.  Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before,  and
had  come  all  the way  from  the Mountain and from Dale, and  were of real
dwarf-make.
When  every guest had been  welcomed  and was finally inside the  gate,
