Mirkwood,  and that if you let it, it  might take you to the Lonely Mountain
or  even  further and to worse places?"  He  used to say  that  on  the path
outside the  front door at  Bag End, especially  after he had been out for a
long walk.'
'Well,  the Road won't sweep me  anywhere for an  hour  at least,' said
Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,  putting their
packs against the bank and their  legs out  into the road. After a rest they
had a good lunch, and then more rest.
The sun was beginning to get  low and the light of afternoon was on the
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road.
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little
traffic to  the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour  or
more when Sam  stopped a  moment as  if  listening. They were  now on  level
ground,  and  the  road  after  much  winding  lay  straight  ahead  through
grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.
'I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,' said Sam.
They  looked back, but the turn of the  road prevented them from seeing
far. 'I wonder if that  is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as
he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide
from the view of the rider came over him.
'It  may not matter much,' he  said apologetically, 'but I would rather
not be seen on the  road - by anyone. I am  sick of my  doings being noticed
and discussed. And if  it is Gandalf,' he added as  an afterthought, 'we can
give him  a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out
of sight!'
The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not
far  from the  road. There  they lay  flat. Frodo  hesitated  for  a second:
curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire  to hide. The
sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head
and peered cautiously above one of the great roots.
Round the  corner came  a black horse, no hobbit-pony  but a full-sized
horse;  and  on  it sat  a large man,  who seemed to  crouch in  the saddle,
wrapped in a great black cloak and  hood, so that only his boots in the high
stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and invisible.
When it reached the  tree and was level with Frodo  the  horse stopped.
The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From
inside the hood came  a  noise as of  someone sniffing to  catch an  elusive
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road.
A sudden  unreasoning  fear of  discovery laid hold  of Frodo,  and  he
thought  of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe,  and yet the desire to get
it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to move his hand.
He felt  that  he had only to  slip  it on, and then he  would  be safe. The
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. 'And I am still in
the Shire,' he thought, as his hand touched the chain on  which  it hung. At
that moment  the  rider  sat up,  and  shook the  reins.  The  horse stepped
forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot.
Frodo crawled to  the edge of the road and watched the rider,  until he
dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to him
that suddenly, before it  passed out  of sight,  the horse turned aside  and
went into the trees on the right.
'Well, I  call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,' said  Frodo  to
himself, as he  walked towards his companions. Pippin and  Sam  had remained
flat  in the  grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo  described the rider and
his strange behaviour.
'I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or           smelling    for me;
and also I felt certain that I did  not want him to discover  me. I've never
seen or fell anything like it in the Shire before.'
'But what has  one of the Big  People got  to do with us?' said Pippin.
'And what is he doing in this part of the world?'
'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing they
have  had trouble  with Big  People,  I believe. But I have  never heard  of
anything like this rider. I wonder where he comes from.'
'Begging  your  pardon,' put  in Sam  suddenly,  'I know where he comes
from. It's from Hobbiton that  this here black  rider comes, unless  there's
more than one. And I know where he's going to.'
'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.
'Why didn't you speak up before?'
'I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to
our  hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me:                    Hello, Sam!
he says.   I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a
strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone.
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the sound of him. He seemed
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had  left his old home for good.
Hissed at me, he did.  It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was
he?   says I to the Gaffer. /    don't know,      says he;   but he wasn't a hobbit. He
was tall and black-like, and he  stooped aver me. I reckon it was one of the
Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny.
'I  couldn't stay  to  hear more, sir, since  you were  waiting; and  I
didn't give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than
a bit blind,  and it  must have been  near dark when this fellow come up the
Hill  and  found him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope  he hasn't
done no harm, sir, nor me.'
'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact I
heard him talking to a  stranger, who  seemed to  be inquiring for me, and I
nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about
it before. I might have been more careful on the road.'
'Still, there may be no connexion between  this rider and the  Gaffer's
stranger,' said Pippin. 'We left Hobbiton  secretly enough, and  I don't see
how he could have followed us.'
'What about the     smelling,    sir?' said Sam. 'And the Gaffer said he was a
black chap.'
'I wish  I had  waited  for  Gandalf,' Frodo  muttered. 'But perhaps it
would only have made matters worse.'
'Then you know  or guess something about this  rider?' said Pippin, who
had caught the muttered words.
'I don't know, and I would rather  not guess,'  said Frodo. 'All right,
cousin Frodo! You can  keep your  secret for the present,  if you want to be
mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a  bite and  a
sup,  but somehow  I think  we had better move on from here.  Your  talk  of
sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.'
'Yes, I think we  will move on now,' said Frodo;  'but  not on the road
-in case  that rider comes back, or another  follows him. We  ought to do  a
good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.'
The shadows  of  the trees  were long and  thin  on the  grass, as they
started off again. They now kept  a stone's throw to  the left of  the road,
and kept out of sight of it as much  as they  could. But this hindered them;
for the grass was thick and  tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the  trees
began to draw together into thickets.
The sun had gone down  red behind the hills at their backs, and evening
was coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long level
