and they saw a figure standing at the  rail, looking  down upon them: an old
man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for
it changed if they  moved  their eyes or if  he stirred. His  face was long,
with  a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to fathom, though the
look  that they now  bore was grave and benevolent, and a  little weary. His
hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his  lips
and ears.
'Like, and yet unlike,' muttered Gimli.
'But come now,' said the  soft voice. 'Two  at least of  you I know  by
name.  Gandalf  I know too  well to  have much  hope that  he seeks help  or
counsel here. But you, Thjoden Lord  of  the Mark  of Rohan are  declared by
your noble devices, and still more by  the fair  countenance of the House of
Eorl.  O worthy son of  Thengel the  Thrice-renowned! Why have you not
come
before, and as a friend? Much  have  I desired to see you, mightiest king of
western lands, and especially  in these latter years, to  save you from  the
unwise and evil counsels that beset  you!  Is it yet  too late? Despite  the
injuries that have been done to me, in  which the  men of Rohan, alas!  have
had some part, still  I  would save you, and deliver you from the ruin  that
draws nigh inevitably,  if you  ride  upon this  road which you have  taken.
Indeed I alone can aid you now.'
Thjoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked
up  at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and
then to Gandalf at his  side; and  he  seemed to hesitate. Gandalf  made  no
sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that
has not  yet  come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval  of
the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent,  as men spell-bound. It
seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so  fair and fittingly to their
lord.  Rough and proud  now seemed all his  dealings with  Thjoden. And over
their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark
in a  darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while Saruman stood beside
a door of  escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through.
There was a heavy silence.
It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. 'The words of this wizard
stand on their heads,'  he growled, gripping  the handle of his axe. 'In the
language  of  Orthanc  help  means ruin, and  saving means  slaying, that is
plain. But we do not come here to beg.'
'Peace!'  said Saruman, and for  a  fleeting  moment his voice was less
suave, and a  light flickered in his eyes and was gone.  'I do not  speak to
you  yet,  Gimli  Gluin's son,' he said. 'Far  away  is  your home and small
concern of yours are the  troubles of this land. But it was not by design of
your own that  you  became  embroiled in them, and so I will  not blame such
part as you have played-a valiant one, I doubt not. But I pray you, allow me
first to speak with the King of Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend.
'What  have you to say,  Thjoden King? Will you have peace with me, and
all  the aid that my  knowledge, founded in  long years, can bring? Shall we
make our counsels together  against  evil days, and repair our injuries with
such good will that our  estates  shall both come to fairer flower than ever
before?'
Still Thjoden  did not  answer.  Whether he strove with anger or  doubt
none could say. Jomer spoke.
'Lord, hear me!'  he said. 'Now  we feel the peril that we  were warned
of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amazed  by an old
liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the
hounds,  if he could. What aid can he give  to you, forsooth? All he desires
is  to  escape  from  his plight. But will you  parley  with this dealer  in
treachery and murder? Remember Thjodred at  the Fords, and the grave of
Hbma
in Helm's Deep!'
'If  we speak of  poisoned tongues what  shall  we say of  yours, young
serpent?' said Saruman,  and the  flash of  his  anger was now plain to see.
'But  come,  Jomer, Jomund's  son!' he went on in his soft  voice again.  To
every man h part. Valour in  arms is yours, and you win high honour thereby.
Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be content. Meddle not in policies
which you do not understand. But maybe. if you become  a king, you Will find
that he must choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the
power  of Orthanc  cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real
or fancied, may lie behind. You have won  a battle  but  not a  war and that
with help on  which you cannot count again.  You may  find the Shadow of the
Wood at your  own door next:  it is wayward, and senseless, and  has no love
for Men.
'But  my  lord of  Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant
men have fallen in battle?  If  you go to war,  needlessly,  for  I did  not
desire  it, then men will be slain. But  if I am a murderer on that account,
then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many
wars, and assailed many who defied  them. Yet with some they have afterwards
made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Thjoden King:  shall we
have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command '
'We will have peace,' said Thjoden  at last thickly and with an effort.
Several of the  Riders  cried out gladly. Thjoden held up his hand. 'Yes, we
will have peace,'  he said, now in a clear voice,  'we will have peace, when
you and all your works have perished -- and the works of your dark master to
whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's
hearts.  You hold out your hand to me,  and  I perceive only a finger of the
claw of  Mordor. Cruel  and cold! Even if your war on me was just as  it was
not, for were you ten times as wise you  would have no right  to rule me and
mine  for your own profit  as  you desired --  even so, what will you say of
your torches in Westfold  and  the children  that lie dead  there?  And they
hewed Hbma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he  was dead.
When
you hang from  a  gibbet at  your  window for the sport of your own crows, I
will have peace with you and  Orthanc.  So  much  for  the House of  Eorl. A
lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn
elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.'
The Riders gazed up at Thjoden like men startled  out of a dream. Harsh
as an old raven's their master's voice sounded in their ears after the music
of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned
over the rail as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly
it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike.
'Gibbets  and crows!'  he  hissed,  and they shuddered  at  the hideous
change.  'Dotard!  What is  the house of  Eorl but  a  thatched  barn  where
brigands  drink  in the reek,  and  their brats roll on the floor among  the
dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes,
slow in the  drawing,  tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his
voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. 'I know not why I have had the
patience  to speak  to you.  For I need  you not, nor  your  little band  of
gallopers,  as swift to fly  as to  advance, Thjoden Horsemaster. Long ago I
offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again,
so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give
me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!
'But you, Gandalf!  For  you  at  least I am grieved,  feeling for your
