then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many
wars, and assailed many who defied  them. Yet with some they have afterwards
made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Thjoden King:  shall we
have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command '
'We will have peace,' said Thjoden  at last thickly and with an effort.
Several of the  Riders  cried out gladly. Thjoden held up his hand. 'Yes, we
will have peace,'  he said, now in a clear voice,  'we will have peace, when
you and all your works have perished -- and the works of your dark master to
whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's
hearts.  You hold out your hand to me,  and  I perceive only a finger of the
claw of  Mordor. Cruel  and cold! Even if your war on me was just as  it was
not, for were you ten times as wise you  would have no right  to rule me and
mine  for your own profit  as  you desired --  even so, what will you say of
your torches in Westfold  and  the children  that lie dead  there?  And they
hewed Hbma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he  was dead.
When
you hang from  a  gibbet at  your  window for the sport of your own crows, I
will have peace with you and  Orthanc.  So  much  for  the House of  Eorl. A
lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn
elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.'
The Riders gazed up at Thjoden like men startled  out of a dream. Harsh
as an old raven's their master's voice sounded in their ears after the music
of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned
over the rail as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly
it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike.
'Gibbets  and crows!'  he  hissed,  and they shuddered  at  the hideous
change.  'Dotard!  What is  the house of  Eorl but  a  thatched  barn  where
brigands  drink  in the reek,  and  their brats roll on the floor among  the
dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes,
slow in the  drawing,  tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his
voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. 'I know not why I have had the
patience  to speak  to you.  For I need  you not, nor  your  little band  of
gallopers,  as swift to fly  as to  advance, Thjoden Horsemaster. Long ago I
offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again,
so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give
me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!
'But you, Gandalf!  For  you  at  least I am grieved,  feeling for your
shame. How comes  it  that you  can  endure such company? For you are proud,
Gandalf-and not  without reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both
deep and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?'
Gandalf stirred, and looked up. 'What have you to say that you did  not
say at our last meeting?' he asked. 'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?'
Saruman paused. 'Unsay?' he mused, as if puzzled. 'Unsay? I endeavoured
to advise you for your own good, but  you scarcely listened. You  are  proud
and  do not love advice,  having  indeed  a store of your own wisdom. But on
that occasion  you erred, I think, misconstruing my  intentions wilfully.  I
fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I  lost  patience.  And  indeed I
regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now  I bear none, though you
return to me in the company  of the violent and  the ignorant. How should I?
Are  we not both members of  a high  and  ancient order, most  excellent  in
Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still
accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the  world.  Let us understand
one another,  and  dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let  them wait on
our decisions! For the common good I am  willing to redress the past, and to
receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?'
So  great was the power that Saruman  exerted in this  last effort that
none that stood  within hearing were unmoved. But  now the  spell was wholly
different.  They  heard the  gentle remonstrance  of  a kindly  king with an
erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out, listening at a  door
to  words  not  meant for  them: ill-mannered  children  or  stupid servants
overhearing the  elusive discourse  of their  elders, and wondering  how  it
would  affect their lot. Of  loftier mould these two were made: reverend and
wise. It was inevitable that they should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend
into  the  tower, to discuss  deep  things beyond their comprehension in the
high chambers of  Orthanc. The door would be closed, and they would  be left
outside, dismissed to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of
Thjoden the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: 'He will betray  us;
he will go -- we shall be lost.'
Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke.
'Saruman, Saruman!' said Gandalf still  laughing. 'Saruman, you  missed
your path  in life. You  should have been the king's jester  and earned your
bread, and stripes  too, by  mimicking  his counsellors. Ah me!'  he paused,
getting the better of his mirth. 'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond
your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand  now too well.  I keep  a
clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than  you  suppose. When last I
visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay,
the guest who has escaped from the roof,  will think  twice  before he comes
back  in  by the door.  Nay,  I do  not think  I  will come  up. But listen,
Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less
strong than  your hope  and fancy made it. So may other  things in which you
still have trust.  Would it not be well to leave it for  a while? To turn to
new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?'
A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before
he could  conceal  it, they saw  through the mask the anguish of  a  mind in
doubt, loathing to  stay and dreading to leave  its refuge. For a second  he
hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke,  and his voice was shrill and
cold. Pride and hate were conquering him.
'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to
speak
with  robbers out of doors? I can  hear you w ell enough here. I am no fool,
and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They  do not stand openly on my stairs, but
I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.'
'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered  Gandalf wearily. 'But
you need not fear for your skin.  I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as
you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect
you. I  am giving you  a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free --  if you
choose.'
'That sounds  well,' sneered Saruman.  'Very  much  in  the  manner  of
Gandalf  the Grey: so condescending, and  so very  kind. I do not doubt that
you would find Orthanc  commodious,  and  my  departure convenient. But
why
should  I  wish  to  leave?  And  what  do you  mean  by  'free'?  There are
conditions, I presume?'
'Reasons for leaving you can see from your  windows.' answered Gandalf.
'Others  will  occur to  your  thought.  Your  servants  are  destroyed  and
scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you  have cheated
your new  master. or tried to do so. When his eye turns  hither,  it will be
the red eye of wrath. But when I say 'free',  I mean 'free': free from bond,
of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if
you desire. But  you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your
staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later,  if  you
