clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than  you  suppose. When last I
visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay,
the guest who has escaped from the roof,  will think  twice  before he comes
back  in  by the door.  Nay,  I do  not think  I  will come  up. But listen,
Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less
strong than  your hope  and fancy made it. So may other  things in which you
still have trust.  Would it not be well to leave it for  a while? To turn to
new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?'
A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before
he could  conceal  it, they saw  through the mask the anguish of  a  mind in
doubt, loathing to  stay and dreading to leave  its refuge. For a second  he
hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke,  and his voice was shrill and
cold. Pride and hate were conquering him.
'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to
speak
with  robbers out of doors? I can  hear you w ell enough here. I am no fool,
and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They  do not stand openly on my stairs, but
I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.'
'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered  Gandalf wearily. 'But
you need not fear for your skin.  I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as
you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect
you. I  am giving you  a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free --  if you
choose.'
'That sounds  well,' sneered Saruman.  'Very  much  in  the  manner  of
Gandalf  the Grey: so condescending, and  so very  kind. I do not doubt that
you would find Orthanc  commodious,  and  my  departure convenient. But
why
should  I  wish  to  leave?  And  what  do you  mean  by  'free'?  There are
conditions, I presume?'
'Reasons for leaving you can see from your  windows.' answered Gandalf.
'Others  will  occur to  your  thought.  Your  servants  are  destroyed  and
scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you  have cheated
your new  master. or tried to do so. When his eye turns  hither,  it will be
the red eye of wrath. But when I say 'free',  I mean 'free': free from bond,
of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if
you desire. But  you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your
staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later,  if  you
merit them.'
Saruman's face  grew  livid, twisted  with rage,  and a  red light  was
kindled in his eyes.  He  laughed wildly. 'Later!' he  cried, and his  voice
rose to a scream.  'Later! Yes,  when you  also  have the Keys  of Barad-dyr
itself, I suppose; and the crowns of  seven kings. and the rods of  the Five
Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair  of boots many sizes larger than
those  that you  wear now.  A modest plan.  Hardly one in which  my help  is
needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you  wish  to  treat
with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are
sober!
And leave behind  these cut-throats and small  rag-tag that  dangle at  your
tail! Good day!' He turned and left the balcony.
'Come back,  Saruman!' said  Gandalf  in  a  commanding  voice. To  the
amazement of the others, Saruman turned again. and as if dragged against his
will, he  came slowly back to the  iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard.
His  face was lined and  shrunken.  His hand clutched  his heavy black staff
like a claw.
'I did  not give you leave to  go,'  said Gandalf sternly. 'I have  not
finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You might still
have turned away  from  folly and  evil, and  have been of  service. But you
choose to  stay  and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then!  But I warn
you. you will not easily come out again.  Not  unless the  dark hands of the
East stretch out to  take you. Saruman!'  he  cried, and his voice  grew  in
power and authority. 'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey,  whom you betrayed.
I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour
now,
and I cast you from the order and from the Council.'
He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in  a clear cold voice.  'Saruman,
your  staff is broken.' There was  a  crack, and the staff  split asunder in
Saruman's hand, and the head  of  it fell down at Gandalf's feet. 'Go!' said
Gandalf. With a  cry Saruman fell back  and crawled away.  At that  moment a
heavy shining thing  came hurtling down from  above. It glanced off the iron
rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf's head, it smote
the stair on which  he  stood. The rail  rang and snapped. The stair cracked
and splintered in glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on
down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark,  but glowing with a heart of fire.
As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up.
'The murderous rogue!' cried Jomer.  But Gandalf was unmoved.  No, that
was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came
from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy,
but
ill aimed.'
'The aim was poor, maybe, because he could  not make up  his mind which
he hated more, you or Saruman,' said Aragorn.
'That may  be so,' said Gandalf.  'Small comfort will those two have in
their  companionship:  they  will  gnaw  one  another  with  words.  But the
punishment is just.  If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive,  it will
be more than he deserves.
'Here, my  lad, I'll take that!  I did not ask  you  to handle it,'  he
cried,  turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly, as if
he  were bearing a great  weight. He went  down to meet him and hastily took
the dark  globe from the hobbit,  wrapping it in the folds of his cloak.  'I
will take care of this,' he  said. 'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman
would have chosen to cast away.'
'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end
of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!'
'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.'
They turned  their  backs on  the doors of Orthanc, and  went down. The
riders  hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The  spell of Saruman
was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed.
'Well, that is done,' said Gandalf. 'Now I must find Treebeard and tell
him how things have gone.'
'He will have guessed,  surely?'  said  Merry. 'Were they likely to end
any other way?'
'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though  they came to  the balance of a
hair. But I had reasons for  trying; some  merciful and some less so.  First
Saruman was shown that the power  of his voice was waning. He cannot be
both
tyrant  and counsellor. When the plot  is ripe it remains  no longer secret.
Yet he  fell into the trap, and tried to deal  with  his victims piece-meal,
while  others listened. Then I  gave him a last choice and  a  fair  one: to
renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and  make amends by helping
us
in our need.  He knows our need,  none better.  Great service he could  have
