'The murderous rogue!' cried Jomer.  But Gandalf was unmoved.  No, that
was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came
from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy,
but
ill aimed.'
'The aim was poor, maybe, because he could  not make up  his mind which
he hated more, you or Saruman,' said Aragorn.
'That may  be so,' said Gandalf.  'Small comfort will those two have in
their  companionship:  they  will  gnaw  one  another  with  words.  But the
punishment is just.  If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive,  it will
be more than he deserves.
'Here, my  lad, I'll take that!  I did not ask  you  to handle it,'  he
cried,  turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly, as if
he  were bearing a great  weight. He went  down to meet him and hastily took
the dark  globe from the hobbit,  wrapping it in the folds of his cloak.  'I
will take care of this,' he  said. 'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman
would have chosen to cast away.'
'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end
of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!'
'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.'
They turned  their  backs on  the doors of Orthanc, and  went down. The
riders  hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The  spell of Saruman
was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed.
'Well, that is done,' said Gandalf. 'Now I must find Treebeard and tell
him how things have gone.'
'He will have guessed,  surely?'  said  Merry. 'Were they likely to end
any other way?'
'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though  they came to  the balance of a
hair. But I had reasons for  trying; some  merciful and some less so.  First
Saruman was shown that the power  of his voice was waning. He cannot be
both
tyrant  and counsellor. When the plot  is ripe it remains  no longer secret.
Yet he  fell into the trap, and tried to deal  with  his victims piece-meal,
while  others listened. Then I  gave him a last choice and  a  fair  one: to
renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and  make amends by helping
us
in our need.  He knows our need,  none better.  Great service he could  have
rendered. But he  has chosen to withhold it, and  keep the power of Orthanc.
He will not  serve, only command. He  lives now  in  terror of the shadow of
Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding  the storm. Unhappy fool!  He will
be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We
cannot  destroy  Orthanc from without, but  Sauron -- who knows  what he can
do?'
'And what  if Sauron does  not conquer? What will you do to him?' asked
Pippin.
'I? Nothing!' said Gandalf. 'I will do nothing  to him. I  do  not wish
for mastery. What w ill become of him? I  cannot say. I grieve that so  much
that was good now festers in the  tower. Still  for us things have  not gone
badly. Strange are the turns of fortune!  Often does  hatred hurt  itself! I
guess that, even if we had entered in, we  could have found few treasures in
Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.'
A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above.
'It seems  that  Saruman  thinks  so too,' said Gandalf.  'Let us leave
them!'
They returned now to the ruins of the  gate. Hardly had they passed out
under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled stones where  they
had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli
and Legolas gazed at them in wonder.
'Here  are three of my  companions,  Treebeard,' said Gandalf. 'I  have
spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.' He named them one by one.
The Old Ent looked at them  long and searchingly, and spoke to  them in
turn.  Last  he  turned  to Legolas.  'So  you  have  come  all the way from
Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!'
'And still is,' said Legolas. 'But not so great that we who dwell there
ever tire of seeing new trees. I  should dearly love to journey in Fangorn's
Wood. I  scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and  I did not wish to turn
back.'
Treebeard's eyes gleamed with pleasure. 'I hope you may have your wish,
ere the hills be much older,' he said.
'I will come,  if  I  have the fortune,' said  Legolas.  'I have made a
bargain  with  my friend  that, if  all  goes well,  we  will  visit Fangorn
together -- by your leave.'
'Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,' said Treebeard.
'The  friend I speak of  is not an Elf,' said Legolas; 'I  mean  Gimli,
Gluin's son here.' Gimli bowed  low,  and the  axe slipped from his belt and
clattered on the ground.
'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. 'A  dwarf
and  an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good  will to Elves; but you ask much. This
is  a strange  friendship!' 'Strange it  may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while
Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but
for  orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's  Wood.  Forty-two he hewed in
the battle.'
'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard.  'That is a better  story! Well, well,
things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But
now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you
must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own house.'
'Yes,  we must go, and go  now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take
your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.'
'Maybe I shall,' said Treebeard. 'But I shall miss them. We have become
friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting  hasty -- growing
backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there,  they  are the first  new thing
under  Sun or Moon that I  have seen for many a long,  long day. I shall not
forget them. I have put their names into the Long List.  Ents will  remember
it.
Ents the earthborn, old as mountains,
the wide-walkers, water drinking;
and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children,
the laughing-folk, the little people,
they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you well!
But if you hear news up in your pleasant land,  in the Shire,  send me word!
You  know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if
you
can!'
'We  will!'  said Merry  and  Pippin together,  and  they  turned  away
hastily.  Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking  his
head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.
'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did  not think  he would. His
heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if  I were overcome and all my
trees destroyed, I would not come  while I had one dark  hole  left to  hide
in.'
'No,'  said Gandalf.  'But  you have not plotted to cover all the world
