Gluin's son here.' Gimli bowed  low,  and the  axe slipped from his belt and
clattered on the ground.
'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. 'A  dwarf
and  an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good  will to Elves; but you ask much. This
is  a strange  friendship!' 'Strange it  may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while
Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but
for  orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's  Wood.  Forty-two he hewed in
the battle.'
'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard.  'That is a better  story! Well, well,
things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But
now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you
must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own house.'
'Yes,  we must go, and go  now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take
your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.'
'Maybe I shall,' said Treebeard. 'But I shall miss them. We have become
friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting  hasty -- growing
backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there,  they  are the first  new thing
under  Sun or Moon that I  have seen for many a long,  long day. I shall not
forget them. I have put their names into the Long List.  Ents will  remember
it.
Ents the earthborn, old as mountains,
the wide-walkers, water drinking;
and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children,
the laughing-folk, the little people,
they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you well!
But if you hear news up in your pleasant land,  in the Shire,  send me word!
You  know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if
you
can!'
'We  will!'  said Merry  and  Pippin together,  and  they  turned  away
hastily.  Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking  his
head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.
'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did  not think  he would. His
heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if  I were overcome and all my
trees destroyed, I would not come  while I had one dark  hole  left to  hide
in.'
'No,'  said Gandalf.  'But  you have not plotted to cover all the world
with your trees and choke all other living things. But there  it is, Saruman
remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can.  He has the
Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.'
'Indeed no!  Ents will see to that,' said Treebeard. 'Saruman shall not
set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over him.'
'Good!' said  Gandalf. 'That is what I  hoped. Now I can go and turn to
other matters with one care the less.  But you must be wary. The waters have
gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I
do  not  doubt  that  there were  deep ways  delved under Orthanc,  and that
Saruman hopes to go and come  unmarked, before long.  If you  will undertake
the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard
remains  a  standing  pool,  or  you  discover  the outlets.  When  all  the
underground places are drowned, and  the outlets blocked, then  Saruman must
stay upstairs and look out of the windows.'
'Leave it to  the Ents!' said Treebeard.  'We shall  search the  valley
from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming back to live
here, old  trees,  wild trees. The Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel
will go here, but  I shall  know of it. Leave  it to Ents! Until seven times
the years  in  which  he tormented  us  have passed,  we shall  not  tire of
watching him.'
Chapter 11. The Palantnr
The sun was sinking  behind the long  western arm of the mountains when
Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from
Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of
the
king's men  went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down
into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace.
Ents in a  solemn  row stood like  statues at the gate, with their long
arms  uplifted, but they made  no sound. Merry and  Pippin looked back, when
they had passed some way down the winding road.  Sunlight was  still shining
in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey  ruins falling into
darkness. Treebeard stood alone  there now, like the distant stump of an old
tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon  the  sunny ledge far
away on the borders of Fangorn.
They  came  to the pillar  of  the  White  Hand.  The  pillar was still
standing,  but the graven hand had  been thrown  down  and broken into small
pieces. Right in the middle  of the road  the long forefinger lay,  white in
the dusk, its red nail darkening to black.
'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.
They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley.
'Are we riding far tonight,  Gandalf?'  asked  Merry after  a while. 'I
don't  know  how you feel with small rag-tag  dangling  behind you; but  the
rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.'
'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no
longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is any comfort
to your pride,  I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in
his thoughts than all the rest of us.  Who you are; how  you came there, and
why; what  you know;  whether you were captured,  and if so, how you escaped
when all the Orcs perished -- it is with those little riddles that the great
mind ¢f Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if
you feel honoured by his concern.'
'Thank  you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your
tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a
