Chapter 11. The Palantnr
The sun was sinking  behind the long  western arm of the mountains when
Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from
Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of
the
king's men  went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down
into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace.
Ents in a  solemn  row stood like  statues at the gate, with their long
arms  uplifted, but they made  no sound. Merry and  Pippin looked back, when
they had passed some way down the winding road.  Sunlight was  still shining
in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey  ruins falling into
darkness. Treebeard stood alone  there now, like the distant stump of an old
tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon  the  sunny ledge far
away on the borders of Fangorn.
They  came  to the pillar  of  the  White  Hand.  The  pillar was still
standing,  but the graven hand had  been thrown  down  and broken into small
pieces. Right in the middle  of the road  the long forefinger lay,  white in
the dusk, its red nail darkening to black.
'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.
They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley.
'Are we riding far tonight,  Gandalf?'  asked  Merry after  a while. 'I
don't  know  how you feel with small rag-tag  dangling  behind you; but  the
rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.'
'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no
longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is any comfort
to your pride,  I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in
his thoughts than all the rest of us.  Who you are; how  you came there, and
why; what  you know;  whether you were captured,  and if so, how you escaped
when all the Orcs perished -- it is with those little riddles that the great
mind ¢f Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if
you feel honoured by his concern.'
'Thank  you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your
tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a
question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?'
Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a
hobbit or two in their care -- to teach them the meaning of the word, and to
correct them. I  beg your pardon.  But  I have given  thought even to  these
simple matters.  We will ride for a few  hours, gently, until we come to the
end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster.
'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's
house  at Edoras over the  plains, a ride  of  some days. But we have  taken
thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm's  Deep, to
warn them that  the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with
many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than
two
or  three together are to go openly over the land,  by day or night, when it
can be avoided.'
'Nothing or a double helping is  your way!'  said Merry. 'I am afraid I
was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Deep and all
the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.'
'Then you'd best learn  something, if you  wish to  understand  what is
happening.  But  not just  now, and not from  me: I have too  many  pressing
things to think about.'
'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less  testy. But
why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!'
Yes,  we  have  won,  but  only  the first victor  and  that  in itself
increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mordor,
which
I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did
so.  The Eye  of Barad-dyr will be looking impatiently towards  the Wizard's
Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.'
The road passed  slowly, winding down the valley. Now  further, and now
nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from the mountains. All
the mists were gone. A  chill wind blew. The moon, now  waxing round, filled
the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen.  The  shoulders of  the mountain  to
their  right  sloped down to bare hills.  The wide plains opened grey before
them.
At  last they halted. Then they turned aside,  leaving the highway  and
taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or so they came
to a dale. It  opened southward,  leaning back into the slope  of  round Dol
Baran,  the last  hill of  the northern ranges,  greenfooted,  crowned  with
heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last  year's bracken,  among
which the tight-curled  fronds of  spring  were just  thrusting through  the
sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick  upon the low banks,  and  under
them they made their camp, two hours  or so before  the middle of the night.
They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of  a spreading  hawthorn,
tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling
at each twig's tip.
Guards were  set,  two at a watch.  The  rest, after  they had  supped,
wrapped  themselves in a cloak and blanket and  slept. The  hobbits lay in a
corner by themselves  upon a pile  of old  bracken.  Merry was  sleepy,  but
Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he
twisted and turned.
'What's the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?'
'No,'  said Pippin, 'but  I'm not  comfortable. I wonder how long it is
since I slept in a bed?'
Merry  yawned. 'Work  it out on your fingers!' he said.  'But you  must
know how long it is since we left Lurien.'
'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.'
'Well,  Rivendell  then,'  said  Merry.  'But  I could  sleep  anywhere
tonight.'
'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You
were riding with Gandalf.'
'Well, what of it?'
'Did you get any news, any information out of him?'
'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it:
you were close by,  and we were talking no secrets. But you  can go with him
tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.'
'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.'
'Oh  yes, he is!'  said Merry,  waking  up  a little, and  beginning to
wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He
can
be  both  kinder  and  more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I
think. He has changed; but  we have not had a chance to see  how  much, yet.
But think of the last part of that  business  with Saruman! Remember Saruman
was  once Gandalf's superior: head  of  the  Council, whatever  that  may be
