Baran,  the last  hill of  the northern ranges,  greenfooted,  crowned  with
heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last  year's bracken,  among
which the tight-curled  fronds of  spring  were just  thrusting through  the
sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick  upon the low banks,  and  under
them they made their camp, two hours  or so before  the middle of the night.
They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of  a spreading  hawthorn,
tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling
at each twig's tip.
Guards were  set,  two at a watch.  The  rest, after  they had  supped,
wrapped  themselves in a cloak and blanket and  slept. The  hobbits lay in a
corner by themselves  upon a pile  of old  bracken.  Merry was  sleepy,  but
Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he
twisted and turned.
'What's the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?'
'No,'  said Pippin, 'but  I'm not  comfortable. I wonder how long it is
since I slept in a bed?'
Merry  yawned. 'Work  it out on your fingers!' he said.  'But you  must
know how long it is since we left Lurien.'
'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.'
'Well,  Rivendell  then,'  said  Merry.  'But  I could  sleep  anywhere
tonight.'
'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You
were riding with Gandalf.'
'Well, what of it?'
'Did you get any news, any information out of him?'
'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it:
you were close by,  and we were talking no secrets. But you  can go with him
tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.'
'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.'
'Oh  yes, he is!'  said Merry,  waking  up  a little, and  beginning to
wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He
can
be  both  kinder  and  more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I
think. He has changed; but  we have not had a chance to see  how  much, yet.
But think of the last part of that  business  with Saruman! Remember Saruman
was  once Gandalf's superior: head  of  the  Council, whatever  that  may be
exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the  White  now.  Saruman
came
when he was told, and  his rod was taken;  and then he was just told  to go,
and he went!'
'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's
all,' Pippin argued. 'That-glass  ball, now. He seemed mighty  pleased  with
it. He knows or  guesses something about it. But does he tell  us  what? No,
not  a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved  it  from rolling into  a pool.
Here, I'll take that, my lad       -- that's all. I wonder what it  is? It felt so
very heavy.' Pippin's voice fell very low as if he was talking to himself.
'Hullo!' said  Merry. 'So that's what is bothering you? Now, Pippin  my
lad, don't  forget Gildor's  saying --  the one Sam  used to quote:                 Do  not
meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger                    .'
'But  our  whole  life for  months  has been  one long meddling  in the
affairs  of Wizards,' said Pippin.  'I  should like a bit  of information as
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.'
'Go to  sleep!'  said Merry. 'You'll  get information enough, sooner or
later. My  dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a  Brandybuck for inquisitiveness;
but is this the time, I ask you?'
'All right! What's the harm in my  telling you  what  I should like:  a
look  at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Gandalf sitting on it,
like a hen on an egg. But it doesn't help much to get no more from you  than
a  you-can't-have-it so-go-to-sleep        !'
'Well, what else could  I say?' said Merry. 'I'm sorry, Pippin, but you
really must wait  till the  morning.  I'll  be as curious as you  like after
breakfast, and I'll  help in any  way I can at wizard-wheedling. But I can't
keep awake  any  longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good
night!'
Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and
it was not  encouraged by  the  sound of Merry breathing softly, asleep in a
few minutes  after saying good night. 'The thought of  the dark globe seemed
to grow stronger as all grew quiet.  Pippin felt  again its  weight  in  his
hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had  looked for
a moment. He tossed and turned and tried to think of something else.
At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round. It was
chilly, and he wrapped  his cloak about him.  The  moon was shining cold and
white, down into  the  dell, and  the shadows of the bushes were black.  All
about lay sleeping shapes. The  two guards were not in view: they were up on
the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some  impulse that he
did not understand,  Pippin  walked  softly to  where Gandalf lay. He looked
down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there
was a  glitter  of eyes under his long  lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily.
But  Gandalf  made no sign;  and drawn forward once more, half  against  his
will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard's head. He was rolled
in  a blanket, with  his cloak  spread over  the  top; and close beside him,
between his right  side and  his  bent arm,  there was a hummock,  something
round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off
it to the ground.
Hardly breathing, Pippin  crept nearer, foot by  foot. At last he knelt
down. Then he put his hands out  stealthily, and slowly  lifted the lump up:
it did not  seem quite  so heavy as he  had  expected. 'Only some  bundle of
oddments, perhaps, after all,'  he thought  with  a strange sense of relief;
but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it.
Then an idea came into his mind.  He  tiptoed away, found a large stone, and
came back.
Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling
down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing
that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and
dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in
his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf
moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed  to be in a strange
tongue; his hand groped  out  and clasped the  wrapped stone, then he sighed
and did not move again.
'You  idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered  to himself. 'You're going  to get
yourself into frightful  trouble. Put it back quick!'  But he found now that
his knees  quaked, and he did not  dare to  go  near enough to the wizard to
reach  the  bundle.  'I'll never get  it back  now without  waking  him,' he
thought, 'not till I'm a bit calmer. S¢ I may as well have a look first. Not
just  here though!'  He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not  far
from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell.
Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball  between  them. He bent
low over it, looking like a greedy  child stooping over a bowl of food, in a
corner away from  others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at  it. The  air
seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet,
