about lay sleeping shapes. The  two guards were not in view: they were up on
the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some  impulse that he
did not understand,  Pippin  walked  softly to  where Gandalf lay. He looked
down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there
was a  glitter  of eyes under his long  lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily.
But  Gandalf  made no sign;  and drawn forward once more, half  against  his
will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard's head. He was rolled
in  a blanket, with  his cloak  spread over  the  top; and close beside him,
between his right  side and  his  bent arm,  there was a hummock,  something
round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off
it to the ground.
Hardly breathing, Pippin  crept nearer, foot by  foot. At last he knelt
down. Then he put his hands out  stealthily, and slowly  lifted the lump up:
it did not  seem quite  so heavy as he  had  expected. 'Only some  bundle of
oddments, perhaps, after all,'  he thought  with  a strange sense of relief;
but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it.
Then an idea came into his mind.  He  tiptoed away, found a large stone, and
came back.
Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling
down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing
that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and
dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in
his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf
moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed  to be in a strange
tongue; his hand groped  out  and clasped the  wrapped stone, then he sighed
and did not move again.
'You  idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered  to himself. 'You're going  to get
yourself into frightful  trouble. Put it back quick!'  But he found now that
his knees  quaked, and he did not  dare to  go  near enough to the wizard to
reach  the  bundle.  'I'll never get  it back  now without  waking  him,' he
thought, 'not till I'm a bit calmer. S¢ I may as well have a look first. Not
just  here though!'  He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not  far
from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell.
Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball  between  them. He bent
low over it, looking like a greedy  child stooping over a bowl of food, in a
corner away from  others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at  it. The  air
seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet,
with the moonlight gleaming on its surface. Then there came a faint glow and
stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that now he could not look
away. Soon all  the inside  seemed on fire;  the ball  was spinning,  or the
lights within were  revolving. Suddenly the lights went out.  He gave a gasp
and struggled; but  he  remained bent,  clasping the ball  with  both hands.
Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly
for a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still.
The cry was  piercing. The guards  leapt down from  the banks.  All the
camp was soon astir.
'So this is the thief!' said Gandalf.  Hastily  he cast his  cloak over
the  globe where  it lay.  'But  you, Pippin!  This is a  grievous  turn  to
things!' He knelt by  Pippin's body: the hobbit was lying on his back rigid,
with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. 'The devilry! What mischief has he
done-to himself, and to all of us?' The wizard's face was drawn and haggard.
He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath;
then he laid  his hands on his brow.  The hobbit shuddered. His eyes closed.
He cried  out;  and sat  up. staring in bewilderment at all the  faces round
him, pale in the moonlight.
'It is not for you, Saruman!' he  cried in a shrill and toneless  voice
shrinking away from Gandalf. 'I will send for it at once. Do you understand?
Say just that!' Then he struggled to get up and escape but Gandalf held  him
gently and firmly.
'Peregrin Took!' he said. 'Come back!'
The  hobbit relaxed  and  fell  back,  clinging  to  the wizard's hand.
'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! Forgive me!'
'Forgive you?' said the wizard. 'Tell me first what you have done!'
'I, I  took  the  ball  and looked at it,' stammered Pippin; 'and I saw
things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn't. And then
he came  and questioned  me; and  he looked  at me, and,  and  that is all I
remember.'
'That won't  do,' said Gandalf sternly. 'What did you see, and what did
you say?'
Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at
him in  silence, except Merry who turned away. But  Gandalf's face was still
hard. 'Speak!' he said.
In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew
clearer  and  stronger. 'I saw a  dark sky, and tall battlements,' he  said.
'And tiny  stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and  clear.
Then the stars went in and out-they were  cut off by things with wings. Very
big, I think, really; but  in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round
the tower. I  thought  there  were nine of them.  One  began to fly straight
towards  me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible -- no, no! I can't
say.
'I tried to get  away, because I thought  it would fly out; but when it
he
had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then   came. He did not speak so
that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood.
'"So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?"
'I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer,  but
it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit."
'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel.
It was like being  stabbed with knives. I struggled.  But  he said: "Wait  a
moment!  We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman  that this dainty is not for
him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!"
'Then  he gloated over me. I felt  I was  falling  to pieces. No, no! I
can't say any more. I don't remember anything else.'
'Look at me!' said Gandalf.
Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a
moment  in silence. Then  his face grew  gentler, and the shadow  of a smile
appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin's head.
'All right!' he said. 'Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no
lie in your eyes, as I feared. But  he did not speak long with you.  A fool,
but an honest  fool,  you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might  have done
worse  in such  a  pass. But mark this!  You  have  been saved, and all your
friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it
a second  time. If he had  questioned  you, then and there, almost certainly
you would have told all that you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too
eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you,  quickly, so that he
could deal with you in the  Dark Tower, slowly.  Don't shudder! If  you will
meddle  in  the affairs  of Wizards, you  must  be prepared to think of such
things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as
evilly as they might.'
He  lifted  Pippin  gently  and  carried  him  back to  his bed.  Merry
followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can,  Pippin!'
said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of
