'And tiny  stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and  clear.
Then the stars went in and out-they were  cut off by things with wings. Very
big, I think, really; but  in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round
the tower. I  thought  there  were nine of them.  One  began to fly straight
towards  me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible -- no, no! I can't
say.
'I tried to get  away, because I thought  it would fly out; but when it
he
had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then   came. He did not speak so
that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood.
'"So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?"
'I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer,  but
it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit."
'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel.
It was like being  stabbed with knives. I struggled.  But  he said: "Wait  a
moment!  We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman  that this dainty is not for
him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!"
'Then  he gloated over me. I felt  I was  falling  to pieces. No, no! I
can't say any more. I don't remember anything else.'
'Look at me!' said Gandalf.
Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a
moment  in silence. Then  his face grew  gentler, and the shadow  of a smile
appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin's head.
'All right!' he said. 'Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no
lie in your eyes, as I feared. But  he did not speak long with you.  A fool,
but an honest  fool,  you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might  have done
worse  in such  a  pass. But mark this!  You  have  been saved, and all your
friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it
a second  time. If he had  questioned  you, then and there, almost certainly
you would have told all that you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too
eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you,  quickly, so that he
could deal with you in the  Dark Tower, slowly.  Don't shudder! If  you will
meddle  in  the affairs  of Wizards, you  must  be prepared to think of such
things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as
evilly as they might.'
He  lifted  Pippin  gently  and  carried  him  back to  his bed.  Merry
followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can,  Pippin!'
said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of
it!  Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear hobbit, don't put  a lump
of  rock  under  my  elbow  again! Now, I will leave you  two together for a
while.'
With  that Gandalf  returned to the others, who  were still standing by
the  Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. 'Peril comes in the night when least
expected,' he said. 'We have had a narrow escape!'
'How is the hobbit, Pippin?' asked Aragorn.
'I think all  will  be well  now,' answered  Gandalf. 'He was  not held
long, and  hobbits have  an  amazing power of  recovery. The memory, or  the
horror of it, will probably fade  quickly. Too  quickly, perhaps. Will  you,
Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.'
'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,' said Aragorn. 'There is one who may
claim it by right.  For this assuredly  is the         palantnr    of Orthanc  from the
treasury  of  Elendil, set here by  the Kings  of Gondor. Now my hour  draws
near. I will take it.'
Gandalf looked  at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others, he
lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it.
'Receive it,  lord!' he said: 'in earnest of other things that shall be
given back. But if I may counsel you in the use  of your own, do not use  it
-- yet! Be wary!'
'When have I been hasty or unwary, who have  waited and prepared for so
many long years?' said Aragorn.
'Never  yet.  Do not then  stumble at the end  of the  road,'  answered
Gandalf. 'But  at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that
stand  here! The hobbit, Peregrin,  above  all should not know  where it  is
bestowed.  The evil fit may come on him again. For alas! he  has  handled it
and  looked in it, as should never have  happened. He ought  never  to  have
touched it in Isengard,  and  there I should have been quicker. But my  mind
was bent  on Saruman, and I did not at once  guess the  nature of the Stone.
Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!'
'Yes, there can  be no doubt,' said Aragorn. 'At last we know the link'
between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explained.' 'Strange
powers have our enemies, and strange  weaknesses!' said Thjoden. 'But it has
long been said:     oft evil will shall evil mar     .'
'That many times is seen,' said Gandalf. 'But at this time we have been
strangely fortunate. Maybe, I  have been  saved by this  hobbit from a grave
blunder. I  had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find
its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not
ready for such a  trial, if indeed I  shall ever be so:  But even if I found
the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for  him to see me, yet
-- until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.'
'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn.
'Not yet,' said Gandalf. 'There remains a short while of doubt which we
must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that  the Stone was in  Orthanc --
why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit  was captive there,  driven
to look in the  glass for his  torment by  Saruman.  That dark mind will  be
filled  now with  the voice  and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it
may take some time before he  learns his error. We must snatch that time. We
have been too leisurely. We must  move. The neighbourhood of  Isengard is no
place now  to  linger in. I will  ride ahead at once with Peregrin  Took. It
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.'
'I will keep  Jomer and ten Riders,'  said the  king. 'They shall  ride
with me at early day.  The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they
have a mind.'
'As you  will,'  said Gandalf. 'But  make all  the speed you may to the
cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!'
At that moment  a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to
be suddenly cut  off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding
their  arms above  their heads, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind
fear and a deadly  cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged
shape  passed over the moon like a  black cloud. It wheeled and went  north,
flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle-earth. The  stars  fainted
before it. It was gone.
They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and
downwards, stiff, his hands clenched.
'Nazgyl!' he cried.  'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The
Nazgyl have crossed the River!  Ride, ride! Wait  not for the  dawn! Let not
the swift wait for the slow! Ride!'
He  sprang  away, calling Shadowfax  as  he ran.  Aragorn followed him.
Going  to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me
this  time,' he said.  'Shadowfax shall show you his  paces.' Then he ran to
the place  where he had slept. Shadowfax  stood there  already. Slinging the
small bag which was all his luggage  across his  shoulders, the wizard leapt
upon the  horse's back. Aragorn lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf's arms,
