its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not
ready for such a  trial, if indeed I  shall ever be so:  But even if I found
the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for  him to see me, yet
-- until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.'
'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn.
'Not yet,' said Gandalf. 'There remains a short while of doubt which we
must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that  the Stone was in  Orthanc --
why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit  was captive there,  driven
to look in the  glass for his  torment by  Saruman.  That dark mind will  be
filled  now with  the voice  and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it
may take some time before he  learns his error. We must snatch that time. We
have been too leisurely. We must  move. The neighbourhood of  Isengard is no
place now  to  linger in. I will  ride ahead at once with Peregrin  Took. It
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.'
'I will keep  Jomer and ten Riders,'  said the  king. 'They shall  ride
with me at early day.  The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they
have a mind.'
'As you  will,'  said Gandalf. 'But  make all  the speed you may to the
cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!'
At that moment  a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to
be suddenly cut  off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding
their  arms above  their heads, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind
fear and a deadly  cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged
shape  passed over the moon like a  black cloud. It wheeled and went  north,
flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle-earth. The  stars  fainted
before it. It was gone.
They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and
downwards, stiff, his hands clenched.
'Nazgyl!' he cried.  'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The
Nazgyl have crossed the River!  Ride, ride! Wait  not for the  dawn! Let not
the swift wait for the slow! Ride!'
He  sprang  away, calling Shadowfax  as  he ran.  Aragorn followed him.
Going  to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me
this  time,' he said.  'Shadowfax shall show you his  paces.' Then he ran to
the place  where he had slept. Shadowfax  stood there  already. Slinging the
small bag which was all his luggage  across his  shoulders, the wizard leapt
upon the  horse's back. Aragorn lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf's arms,
,wrapped in cloak and blanket.
'Farewell! Follow fast!' cried Gandalf. 'Away, Shadowfax!'
The  great  horse  tossed his  head. His  flowing tail  flicked in  the
moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the  earth, and was gone like the
north wind from the mountains.
'A beautiful, restful  night!' said  Merry to Aragorn. 'Some folk  have
wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf
-- and there he goes! Instead of being turned into  a stone himself to stand
here for ever as a warning.'
'If  you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not  he, how
would it be now?' said Aragorn. 'You might have done worse. Who can say?
But
now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At  once. Go and get ready, and
bring anything that Pippin left behind. Make haste!'
Over the  plains  Shadowfax  was  flying,  needing  no  urging  and  no
guidance. Less than  an hour  had  passed, and they had reached the Fords of
Isen and crossed  them. The Mound of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey
behind them.
Pippin was recovering. He  was warm, but the wind in his  face was keen
and refreshing. He was  with  Gandalf. The horror of  the stone  and  of the
hideous shadow over the  moon was fading, things left behind in the mists of
the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath.
'I did not know  you rode bare-back, Gandalf,' he said. 'You  haven't a
saddle or a bridle!'
'I  do not ride elf-fashion,  except on Shadowfax,' said Gandalf.  'But
Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax:  he is willing to
carry you-or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It  is then his business
to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.'
'How  fast is  he going?'  asked Pippin. 'Fast  by  the  wind, but very
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!'
'He  is  running  now  as  fast  as  the swiftest horse could  gallop,'
answered Gandalf; 'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little
here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White
Mountains are  drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the  Thrihyrne peaks
like black spears. It will not  be long before we reach the  branching roads
and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.'
Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to
himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as the miles ran
under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught
the  words: a few lines came clear  to his  ears  through the rushing of the
wind:
Tall ships and tall kings
Three times three,
What brought they from the foundered land
Over the flowing sea?
Seven stars and seven stones
And one white tree.
'What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin.
'I was  just  running over  some of the  Rhymes  of  Lore in  my mind '
answered  the wizard. 'Hobbits,  I suppose, have forgotten  them, even those
that they ever knew.'
'No, not  all,'  said  Pippin.  'And  we have many  of our  own,  which
wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard  this one. What is it
about -- the seven stars and seven stones?'
'About the   palantnri    of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf.
'And what are they?'
'The name meant       that which looks far away        . The Orthanc-stone was one.'
'Then it was not made, not made' -- Pippin hesitated -- 'by the Enemy?'
'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by  Saruman. It is  beyond his art, and beyond
Sauron's too. The      palantnri    came from beyond Westernesse  from Eldamar.
The
Noldor made  them. Flanor himself,  maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago
that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is  nothing that Sauron
cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for  Saruman! It was his downfall,  as  I now
perceive.  Perilous to us all  are the devices  of an  art  deeper  than  we
possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool!  to keep it secret, for
his own  profit. No word did he ever  speak of it to any of the  Council. We
had not yet given  thought  to the fate of  the           palantnri    of Gondor  in  its
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even  in Gondor they were a
secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of
lore among the D®nedain.'
'What  did  the Men of old use  them for?' asked Pippin, delighted  and
astonished at getting answers to  so  many questions, and wondering how long
it would last.
