Hissed at me, he did.  It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was
he?   says I to the Gaffer. /    don't know,      says he;   but he wasn't a hobbit. He
was tall and black-like, and he  stooped aver me. I reckon it was one of the
Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny.
'I  couldn't stay  to  hear more, sir, since  you were  waiting; and  I
didn't give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than
a bit blind,  and it  must have been  near dark when this fellow come up the
Hill  and  found him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope  he hasn't
done no harm, sir, nor me.'
'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact I
heard him talking to a  stranger, who  seemed to  be inquiring for me, and I
nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about
it before. I might have been more careful on the road.'
'Still, there may be no connexion between  this rider and the  Gaffer's
stranger,' said Pippin. 'We left Hobbiton  secretly enough, and  I don't see
how he could have followed us.'
'What about the     smelling,    sir?' said Sam. 'And the Gaffer said he was a
black chap.'
'I wish  I had  waited  for  Gandalf,' Frodo  muttered. 'But perhaps it
would only have made matters worse.'
'Then you know  or guess something about this  rider?' said Pippin, who
had caught the muttered words.
'I don't know, and I would rather  not guess,'  said Frodo. 'All right,
cousin Frodo! You can  keep your  secret for the present,  if you want to be
mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a  bite and  a
sup,  but somehow  I think  we had better move on from here.  Your  talk  of
sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.'
'Yes, I think we  will move on now,' said Frodo;  'but  not on the road
-in case  that rider comes back, or another  follows him. We  ought to do  a
good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.'
The shadows  of  the trees  were long and  thin  on the  grass, as they
started off again. They now kept  a stone's throw to  the left of  the road,
and kept out of sight of it as much  as they  could. But this hindered them;
for the grass was thick and  tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the  trees
began to draw together into thickets.
The sun had gone down  red behind the hills at their backs, and evening
was coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long level
over which  it had run straight for  some miles.  At that point it bent left
and  went down into the lowlands of  the Yale  making for Stock;  but a lane
branched right, winding  through a  wood of ancient oak-trees on its way  to
Woodhall. 'That is the way for us,' said Frodo.
Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk  of a tree: it
was  still alive  and had leaves  on  the small branches that it had put out
round the  broken  stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it  was hollow,  and
could  be entered  by  a great  crack  on the  side  away from the road. The
hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a floor  of old leaves and  decayed
wood.  They rested and had a light  meal, talking quietly and listening from
time to time.
Twilight  was about  them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the  road began to
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A  star  came out above the trees in
the darkening East before them.  They went  abreast  and in step, to keep up
their spirits.  After  a time, as the stars  grew thicker and  brighter, the
feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened  for the sound of
hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk
along,  especially  when  they  are drawing near to home at night. With most
hobbits  it  is  a supper-song  or a bed-song;  but these  hobbits  hummed a
walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed).
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune  that  was as old as  the hills,
and taught  it to Frodo as they walked in the  lanes of the Water-valley and
talked about Adventure.
Upon the hearth the fire is red,
Beneath the roof there is a bed;
But not yet weary are our feet,
Still round the corner we may meet
A sudden tree or standing stone
That none have seen but we alone.
Tree and flower and leaf and grass,
Let them pass! Let them pass!
Hill and water under sky,
Pass them by! Pass them by!
Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate,
And though we pass them by today,
Tomorrow we may come this way
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun.
Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,
Let them go! Let them go!
Sand and stone and pool and dell,
Fare you well! Fare you well!
Home is behind, the world ahead,
And there are many paths to tread
Through shadows to the edge of night,
Until the stars are all alight.
Then world behind and home ahead,
We'll wander back to home and bed.
Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,
Away shall fade! Away shall fade!
Fire and lamp, and meat and bread,
And then to bed! And then to bed!
The song ended. 'And        now   to bed! And     now   to bed!' sang Pippin in a high
voice.
'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.'
They slopped suddenly  and  stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening.
There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but coming slow and
clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and  ran
into the deeper shade under the oak-trees.
'Don't let  us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I
want to see if it is another Black Rider.'
'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!'
The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better
than the general  darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a
large tree-bole, while  Frodo  crept back a few yards  towards  the lane. It
showed grey and pale, a line  of fading light through the wood. Above it the
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon.
The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass
across  the lighter  space between two trees, and then halt. It looked  like
the  black shade of a horse led by a smaller black  shadow. The black shadow
