himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as the miles ran
under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught
the  words: a few lines came clear  to his  ears  through the rushing of the
wind:
Tall ships and tall kings
Three times three,
What brought they from the foundered land
Over the flowing sea?
Seven stars and seven stones
And one white tree.
'What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin.
'I was  just  running over  some of the  Rhymes  of  Lore in  my mind '
answered  the wizard. 'Hobbits,  I suppose, have forgotten  them, even those
that they ever knew.'
'No, not  all,'  said  Pippin.  'And  we have many  of our  own,  which
wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard  this one. What is it
about -- the seven stars and seven stones?'
'About the   palantnri    of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf.
'And what are they?'
'The name meant       that which looks far away        . The Orthanc-stone was one.'
'Then it was not made, not made' -- Pippin hesitated -- 'by the Enemy?'
'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by  Saruman. It is  beyond his art, and beyond
Sauron's too. The      palantnri    came from beyond Westernesse  from Eldamar.
The
Noldor made  them. Flanor himself,  maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago
that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is  nothing that Sauron
cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for  Saruman! It was his downfall,  as  I now
perceive.  Perilous to us all  are the devices  of an  art  deeper  than  we
possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool!  to keep it secret, for
his own  profit. No word did he ever  speak of it to any of the  Council. We
had not yet given  thought  to the fate of  the           palantnri    of Gondor  in  its
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even  in Gondor they were a
secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of
lore among the D®nedain.'
'What  did  the Men of old use  them for?' asked Pippin, delighted  and
astonished at getting answers to  so  many questions, and wondering how long
it would last.
'To  see far  off, and to converse in thought with  one  another,' said
Gandalf. 'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They
set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at  Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring
of Isengard. The  chief  and master of these was under  the Dome of Stars at
Osgiliath before  its ruin. The three others were far  away in the North. In
the house  of Elrond  it is told that they were at Ann®minas, and  Amon Syl,
and Elendil's Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards Mithlond in the
Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie.
'Each  palantnr    replied to each, but all those in Gondor were  ever open
to the view of Osgiliath.  Now  it appears that,  as the rock of Orthanc has
withstood  the  storms of time, so  there  the           palantnr     of  that tower  has
remained.  But alone  it could do nothing but see small images of things far
off  and days remote. Very  useful, no doubt, that  was  to Saruman;  yet it
seems that he was not content. Further and further abroad he gazed, until he
cast his gaze upon Barad-dyr. Then he was caught!
'Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or
drowned deep? But  one. at least Sauron  must have obtained and  mastered to
his purposes. I guess that  it was the Ithil-stone,  for he took Minas Ithil
long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become.
'Easy  it  is  now to guess how quickly the roving  eye of Saruman  was
trapped and held; and how  ever  since he has been persuaded  from afar, and
daunted when persuasion  would not serve. The biter bit, the  hawk under the
eagle's foot, the spider  in a  steel web!  How long, I  wonder, has he been
constrained to  come often to his glass for inspection and instruction,  and
the Orthanc-stone so bent towards Barad-dyr  that, if  any  save  a will  of
adamant now looks into it,  it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither?
And  how it draws  one to itself! Have I  not  felt it?  Even now  my  heart
desires to test my will  upon it,  to see if I could not wrench it from  him
and turn it where I  would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time
to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Flanor at
their work, while both  the  White Tree and the  Golden were  in flower!' He
sighed and fell silent.
'I wish I had known all this before,' said Pippin. 'I had  no notion of
what I was doing.'
'Oh yes,  you had,' said  Gandalf. 'You  knew you were behaving wrongly
and  foolishly;  and you told yourself so,  though you did not listen. I did
not tell you all this before, because  it is only by  musing on all that has
happened that I have at last  understood, even as we ride together. But if I
had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier
to  resist.  On the  contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After  that
advice about fire goes to the heart.'
'It does,' said  Pippin. 'If all the seven  stones were laid out before
me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.'
'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.'
'But I should like to know--' Pippin began.
'Mercy!' cried Gandalf. 'If the giving of information is to be the cure
of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my  days in answering
you. What more do you want to know?'
'The  names  of all the stars, and of all living  things, and the whole
history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of  the Sundering Seas ' laughed
Pippin. 'Of  course!  What less? But I  am  not in  a hurry tonight.  At the
moment  I was  just wondering about the  black  shadow. I  heard  you  shout
"messenger of Mordor". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?'
'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgyl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have
taken you away to the Dark Tower.'
'But it was not  coming  for me, was  it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it
didn't know that I had... '
'Of course not,' said  Gandalf. 'It is two hundred  leagues or  more in
straight  flight  from Barad-dyr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgyl  would take a
few hours to fly between  them.  But Saruman certainly looked  in  the Stone
since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been
read than he  intended. A  messenger has  been sent  to  find out what he is
doing. And  after what has happened tonight another will come, I think,  and
swiftly. So Saruman will come to  the last pinch of the vice that he has put
his  hand in. He has  no captive to  send. He has no Stone to see  with, and
cannot answer the summons. Sauron will  only believe that he  is withholding
the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not  help Saruman to tell
the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe
in Orthanc. So  whether  he  will  or  no,  he  will appear a rebel. Yet  he
rejected  us, so as  to  avoid  that very thing! What he will  do in such  a
plight,  I  cannot guess.  He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to
resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap  the Nazgyl,
or  at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the  air. In  that case
let Rohan look to its horses!
