happened that I have at last  understood, even as we ride together. But if I
had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier
to  resist.  On the  contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After  that
advice about fire goes to the heart.'
'It does,' said  Pippin. 'If all the seven  stones were laid out before
me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.'
'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.'
'But I should like to know--' Pippin began.
'Mercy!' cried Gandalf. 'If the giving of information is to be the cure
of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my  days in answering
you. What more do you want to know?'
'The  names  of all the stars, and of all living  things, and the whole
history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of  the Sundering Seas ' laughed
Pippin. 'Of  course!  What less? But I  am  not in  a hurry tonight.  At the
moment  I was  just wondering about the  black  shadow. I  heard  you  shout
"messenger of Mordor". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?'
'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgyl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have
taken you away to the Dark Tower.'
'But it was not  coming  for me, was  it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it
didn't know that I had... '
'Of course not,' said  Gandalf. 'It is two hundred  leagues or  more in
straight  flight  from Barad-dyr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgyl  would take a
few hours to fly between  them.  But Saruman certainly looked  in  the Stone
since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been
read than he  intended. A  messenger has  been sent  to  find out what he is
doing. And  after what has happened tonight another will come, I think,  and
swiftly. So Saruman will come to  the last pinch of the vice that he has put
his  hand in. He has  no captive to  send. He has no Stone to see  with, and
cannot answer the summons. Sauron will  only believe that he  is withholding
the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not  help Saruman to tell
the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe
in Orthanc. So  whether  he  will  or  no,  he  will appear a rebel. Yet  he
rejected  us, so as  to  avoid  that very thing! What he will  do in such  a
plight,  I  cannot guess.  He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to
resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap  the Nazgyl,
or  at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the  air. In  that case
let Rohan look to its horses!
'But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may  be
that the counsels of the Enemy will  be confused,  or hindered by  his wrath
with Saruman. It  may be that he will learn that  I was there and stood upon
the stairs of Orthanc-with  hobbits at my tail. Or that  an heir  of Elendil
lives and stood beside  me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the  armour of
Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what
I fear. And so we fly -- not  from  danger but  into  greater danger.  Every
stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.'
Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had
struck him. Grey land passed under them.
'See now!' said Gandalf. 'The Westfold dales  are  opening  before  us.
Here we come back to the eastward  road. The dark shadow yonder is the
mouth
of the  Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond and the  Glittering Caves.  Do
not ask  me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time
you  may  get an answer  longer than you wish.  You  will not see the  caves
yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.'
'I thought you were going to stop  at Helm's Deep!' said Pippin. 'Where
are you going then?'
'To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.'
'Oh! And how far is that?'
'Leagues  upon  leagues,'  answered  Gandalf.  'Thrice as  far  as  the
dwellings of King Thjoden, and they are more than a hundred  miles east from
here, as  the  messengers of  Mordor fly. Shadowfax must run  a longer road.
Which will prove the swifter?
'We  shall ride  now till  daybreak, and that is  some hours away. Then
even Shadowfax must  rest, in some hollow of the  hills: at Edoras, I  hope.
Sleep, if  you can! You  may see the first  glimmer of dawn upon the  golden
roof of  the house of Eorl. And in two days thence you shall see the  purple
shadow  of Mount Mindolluin and the  walls of the tower of Denethor white in
the morning.
'Away  now,  Shadowfax!  Run,  greatheart,  run as  you have never  run
before! Now we are come to the lands  where you were foaled  and every stone
you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!'
Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had summoned
him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his feet; night rushed
over him.
As he  fell  slowly into  sleep, Pippin had a  strange feeling:  he and
Gandalf  were  still as stone, seated  upon the  statue of a running  horse,
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind.
