As he  fell  slowly into  sleep, Pippin had a  strange feeling:  he and
Gandalf  were  still as stone, seated  upon the  statue of a running  horse,
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind.
* BOOK IV *
Chapter 1. The Taming of Smjagol
'Well, master,  we're in  a fix and  no mistake,'  said Sam  Gamgee. He
stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and peered out  with
puckered eyes into the gloom.
It was the third evening since they had fled from  the Company,  as far
as they could  tell:  they had  almost lost count of the  hours during which
they had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes and stones of the
Emyn
Muil,  sometimes retracing  their  steps  because  they could  find  no  way
forward,  sometimes discovering  that they  had wandered in a circle back to
where they  had been hours before. Yet on the whole they had worked steadily
eastward, keeping as near as they could find a way to the outer edge of this
strange  twisted  knot of hills. But  always  they  found its  outward faces
sheer,  high  and  impassable, frowning  over  the plain  below;  beyond its
tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not  even
a bird was to be seen.
The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak, its
feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken highlands crowned with
drifting  cloud. A chill wind` blew from the East. Night was gathering  over
the shapeless  lands before them; the sickly  green of them was fading  to a
sullen brown. Far away to the right the Anduin, that had gleamed fitfully in
sun-breaks during the day, was now  hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not
look beyond the  River,  back to Gondor, to  their friends, to the lands  of
Men. South and east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night,
a dark line hung, like distant mountains  of motionless smoke. Every now and
again a  tiny red gleam far away  flickered upwards on the rim of earth  and
sky.
`What a fix! ' said Sam.  `That's the one place  in all the lands we've
ever heard of that we don't want to see any closer; and that's the one place
we're trying  to  get  to! And  that's just where we can't get, nohow. We've
come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can't get down;  and if  we did
get down, we'd find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can
you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind.
'Yes, I can smell  it,'  said Frodo, but he did not move,  and his eyes
remained fixed, staring out towards the  dark line and the flickering flame.
`Mordor! ' he muttered under his breath. 'If I  must go there I wish I could
come there quickly and make an  end! ' He shuddered. The wind was chilly and
yet heavy with an odour of cold decay.  `Well,' he said, at last withdrawing
his eyes, `we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more
sheltered spot,  and camp once more; and perhaps another  day will show us a
path.'
'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam.  `Or  maybe no day.
We've come the wrong way.'
'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my  doom, I think, to go  to  that Shadow
yonder, so that a way will  be found.  But will good or evil show it to  me?
What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I
am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices
have proved ill. I should have  left the Company long  before, and come down
from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard
of Battle Plain  to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible  for you
and me alone to find a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank.
Every  day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don't know
what is to be done. What food have we got left?'
'Only those, what d'you call 'em,         lembas   , Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But
they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I
first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I
do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug -- aye, half  a mug -- of beer would
go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last  camp,
and what use  has  it been? Naught  to  make a fire with, for  a start;  and
naught to cook, not even grass!'
They turned  away and went down into a  stony hollow. The westering sun
was caught into clouds,  and night came swiftly. They slept as  well as they
could  for the  cold, turn and  turn about,  in a  nook among  great  jagged
pinnacles of weathered rock; at  least they were sheltered from the easterly
wind.
`Did you see them  again, Mr. Frodo?' asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and
chilled, munching wafers of          lembas   , in the cold grey of early morning.
'No,' said Frodo. `I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights
