get down, we'd find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can
you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind.
'Yes, I can smell  it,'  said Frodo, but he did not move,  and his eyes
remained fixed, staring out towards the  dark line and the flickering flame.
`Mordor! ' he muttered under his breath. 'If I  must go there I wish I could
come there quickly and make an  end! ' He shuddered. The wind was chilly and
yet heavy with an odour of cold decay.  `Well,' he said, at last withdrawing
his eyes, `we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more
sheltered spot,  and camp once more; and perhaps another  day will show us a
path.'
'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam.  `Or  maybe no day.
We've come the wrong way.'
'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my  doom, I think, to go  to  that Shadow
yonder, so that a way will  be found.  But will good or evil show it to  me?
What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I
am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices
have proved ill. I should have  left the Company long  before, and come down
from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard
of Battle Plain  to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible  for you
and me alone to find a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank.
Every  day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don't know
what is to be done. What food have we got left?'
'Only those, what d'you call 'em,         lembas   , Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But
they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I
first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I
do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug -- aye, half  a mug -- of beer would
go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last  camp,
and what use  has  it been? Naught  to  make a fire with, for  a start;  and
naught to cook, not even grass!'
They turned  away and went down into a  stony hollow. The westering sun
was caught into clouds,  and night came swiftly. They slept as  well as they
could  for the  cold, turn and  turn about,  in a  nook among  great  jagged
pinnacles of weathered rock; at  least they were sheltered from the easterly
wind.
`Did you see them  again, Mr. Frodo?' asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and
chilled, munching wafers of          lembas   , in the cold grey of early morning.
'No,' said Frodo. `I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights
now.'
`Nor me,' said  Sam. `Grrr!  Those eyes did give me a turn! But perhaps
we've shaken  him off at  last, the miserable slinker. Gollum! I'll give him
gollum    in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.'
'I  hope  you'll never need to,'  said  Frodo.  `I don't  know  how  he
followed us; but it may be that  he's lost us again, as you say. In this dry
bleak  land we  can't leave  many  footprints, nor much scent, even  for his
snuffling nose.'
'I hope that's the way of it,' said Sam. 'I wish we could be rid of him
for good!'
'So do I,' said Frodo; 'but he's not my chief trouble. I wish we  could
get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on  the  east side,
stuck up here with  nothing but  the  dead  flats between me and that Shadow
yonder. There's an Eye in it. Come on! We've got to get down today somehow.'
But  that day wore on, and  when  afternoon faded towards evening  they
were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of escape.
Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied  that they
heard faint sounds behind  them, a stone falling,  or the  imagined step  of
flapping feet on the rock. But if they halted  and  stood  still  listening,
they heard  no more,  nothing but  the  wind sighing over  the  edges of the
stones -- yet even that reminded them of breath softly hissing through sharp
teeth.
All that  day  the  outer  ridge of the  Emyn  Muil  had  been  bending
gradually northward,  as  they  struggled  on.  Along  its  brink there  now
stretched  a wide tumbled flat of scored and weathered rock,  cut  every now
and again by trench-like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep notches in
the cliff-face. To find a path in  these clefts, which  were becoming deeper
and more  frequent, Frodo  and Sam were driven to their left, well away from
the edge, and they did not notice that for several miles they had been going
slowly but steadily downhill: the cliff-top was sinking towards the level of
the lowlands.
At last  they were brought to a  halt.  The ridge took  a  sharper bend
northward and was gashed by  a deeper  ravine. On the further side it reared
up again,  many fathoms at a single  leap: a great grey cliff  loomed before
them, cut sheer down  as if by  a  knife stroke.  They could  go  no further
forwards, and must turn now either west or east. But west  would  lead  them
only  into more labour and delay, back towards the  heart of the hills; east
would take them to the outer precipice.
`There's nothing for it but  to scramble down  this gully,  Sam,'  said
Frodo. `Let's see what it leads to!'
'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam.
The  cleft  was  longer and deeper  than it seemed. Some way down  they
found a  few gnarled and stunted  trees,  the first they  had seen for days:
twisted birch for  the  most part, with here and there a fir-tree. Many were
dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds. Once in milder days
there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty
yards,  the  trees  came to  an end, though  old broken stumps  straggled on
almost to the cliff's brink. The bottom of  the  gully, which  lay along the
edge of a rock-fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply  down.
When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out.
`Look!' he said. `We must have come down a  long way, or else the cliff
has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.'
Sam knelt beside  him  and peered  reluctantly over the  edge.  Then he
glanced up at the great  cliff rising up, away on  their left. `Easier! ' he
grunted. `Well, I  suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as
can't fly can jump!'
`It would be a big jump still,' said Frodo. `About, well' --  he  stood
for a moment measuring it with his eyes -- `about eighteen  fathoms I should
guess. Not more.'
'And that's enough! ' said Sam. `Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a
height! But looking's better than climbing.'
`All the same,' said Frodo, `I think  we could climb here; and  I think
we shall have to try. See -- the rock is quite different from  what it was a
few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.'
The outer fall  was  indeed no  longer  sheer,  but  sloped outwards  a
little. It looked  like a great rampart or  sea-wall whose  foundations  had
shifted, so that  its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving great
fissures  and  long  slanting edges that were in places  almost as  wide  as
stairs.
`And if we're going to try and  get down, we had better  try  at  once.
It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.'
The smoky  blur of the mountains  in the  East  was  lost  in a  deeper
blackness that was already reaching out  westwards with long arms. There was
a distant  mutter of  thunder borne on the rising breeze. Frodo sniffed  the
