would take them to the outer precipice.
`There's nothing for it but  to scramble down  this gully,  Sam,'  said
Frodo. `Let's see what it leads to!'
'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam.
The  cleft  was  longer and deeper  than it seemed. Some way down  they
found a  few gnarled and stunted  trees,  the first they  had seen for days:
twisted birch for  the  most part, with here and there a fir-tree. Many were
dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds. Once in milder days
there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty
yards,  the  trees  came to  an end, though  old broken stumps  straggled on
almost to the cliff's brink. The bottom of  the  gully, which  lay along the
edge of a rock-fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply  down.
When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out.
`Look!' he said. `We must have come down a  long way, or else the cliff
has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.'
Sam knelt beside  him  and peered  reluctantly over the  edge.  Then he
glanced up at the great  cliff rising up, away on  their left. `Easier! ' he
grunted. `Well, I  suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as
can't fly can jump!'
`It would be a big jump still,' said Frodo. `About, well' --  he  stood
for a moment measuring it with his eyes -- `about eighteen  fathoms I should
guess. Not more.'
'And that's enough! ' said Sam. `Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a
height! But looking's better than climbing.'
`All the same,' said Frodo, `I think  we could climb here; and  I think
we shall have to try. See -- the rock is quite different from  what it was a
few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.'
The outer fall  was  indeed no  longer  sheer,  but  sloped outwards  a
little. It looked  like a great rampart or  sea-wall whose  foundations  had
shifted, so that  its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving great
fissures  and  long  slanting edges that were in places  almost as  wide  as
stairs.
`And if we're going to try and  get down, we had better  try  at  once.
It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.'
The smoky  blur of the mountains  in the  East  was  lost  in a  deeper
blackness that was already reaching out  westwards with long arms. There was
a distant  mutter of  thunder borne on the rising breeze. Frodo sniffed  the
air and looked up  doubtfully at the  sky. He strapped his belt  outside his
cloak  and  tightened it, and settled  his  light pack on  his back; then he
stepped towards the edge. `I'm going to try it,' he said.
`Very good! ' said Sam gloomily. `But I'm going first.'
'You? ' said Frodo. `What's made you change your mind about climbing?'
'I haven't changed my mind.  But it's only sense: put the one lowest as
is most  likely to slip. I don't want to come down atop of you and knock you
off no sense in killing two with one fall.'
Before Frodo  could  stop  him,  he  sat down,  swung his legs over the
brink,  and twisted round, scrabbling with  his toes for a  foothold.  It is
doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more unwise.
'No,  no! Sam, you  old ass! ' said Frodo.  `You'll kill  yourself  for
certain going  over like that without  even a look to see what  to make for.
Come back! '  He took Sam under  the armpits and hauled him up  again. 'Now,
wait a bit and be patient! ' he said. Then he lay on the ground, leaning out
and looking  down: but the light  seemed to be fading quickly, although  the
sun had not yet set. 'I think we  could manage this,' he  said presently. `I
could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your  head and followed me
carefully.'
`I don't know how you can be so sure,' said Sam. `Why! You can't see to
the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where there's nowhere
to put your feet or your hands?'
'Climb back, I suppose,' said Frodo.
'Easy said,' objected Sam. 'Better wait till morning and more light.'
`No! Not if I can help it,' said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence.
`I grudge every hour, every minute. I'm  going down to try it out. Don't you
follow till I come back or call!'
Gripping  the stony lip of  the  fall with  his fingers he  let himself
gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes found
a ledge.  'On_ e step down!  ' he  said. 'And this ledge broadens out to the
right. I could stand there without a hold. I'll--' his words were cut short.
The  hurrying  darkness, now gathering  great speed, rushed up from the
East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right
overhead. Searing  lightning smote down into the hills. Then came a blast of
savage wind, and with  it, mingling with its  roar, there came a high shrill
shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as they
fled  from Hobbiton, and even there  in the woods of the Shire it had frozen
their blood.  Out  here  in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced
them  with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam
fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands
over his head and ears. He swayed,  slipped,  and slithered downwards with a
wailing cry.
Sam  heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master!
' he called. 'Master!'.
He heard no answer.  He  found he was shaking all over, but he gathered
his breath, and once again he shouted: 'Master!' The wind seemed to blow his
voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up  the gully and away
over the hills, a faint answering cry came to his ears:
'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.'
Frodo  was  calling with a  weak voice. ,He  was not actually very  far
away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on
a wider ledge not  many yards lower down. Fortunately  the rock-face at this
point leaned well back and  the  wind had pressed him against the  cliff, so
that he had not toppled  over. He steadied himself a little, laying his face
against the cold stone, feeling  his heart pounding. But either the darkness
had  grown  complete, or else  his eyes had lost  their sight. All was black
about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.
`Come  back!  Come  back! '  he heard Sam's voice out  of the blackness
above.
`I can't,' he said. `I  can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't  move
yet.'
`What  can  I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?  ' shouted Sam, leaning out
dangerously far.  Why could not his master see?  It was dim, certainly,  but
not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him, a grey forlorn figure
splayed against  the cliff. But  he was far out of the  reach of any helping
hand.
There  was another crack  of  thunder;  and then  the  rain came.  In a
blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold.
'I'm  coming  down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in
that way he could not have said.
`No,  no!  wait!  ' Frodo  called back, more strongly now. `I  shall be
better  soon. I feel  better already. Wait! You can't do anything  without a
rope.'
`Rope!'  cried  Sam, talking wildly to himself  in  his  excitement and
