their blood.  Out  here  in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced
them  with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam
fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands
over his head and ears. He swayed,  slipped,  and slithered downwards with a
wailing cry.
Sam  heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master!
' he called. 'Master!'.
He heard no answer.  He  found he was shaking all over, but he gathered
his breath, and once again he shouted: 'Master!' The wind seemed to blow his
voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up  the gully and away
over the hills, a faint answering cry came to his ears:
'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.'
Frodo  was  calling with a  weak voice. ,He  was not actually very  far
away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on
a wider ledge not  many yards lower down. Fortunately  the rock-face at this
point leaned well back and  the  wind had pressed him against the  cliff, so
that he had not toppled  over. He steadied himself a little, laying his face
against the cold stone, feeling  his heart pounding. But either the darkness
had  grown  complete, or else  his eyes had lost  their sight. All was black
about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.
`Come  back!  Come  back! '  he heard Sam's voice out  of the blackness
above.
`I can't,' he said. `I  can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't  move
yet.'
`What  can  I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?  ' shouted Sam, leaning out
dangerously far.  Why could not his master see?  It was dim, certainly,  but
not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him, a grey forlorn figure
splayed against  the cliff. But  he was far out of the  reach of any helping
hand.
There  was another crack  of  thunder;  and then  the  rain came.  In a
blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold.
'I'm  coming  down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in
that way he could not have said.
`No,  no!  wait!  ' Frodo  called back, more strongly now. `I  shall be
better  soon. I feel  better already. Wait! You can't do anything  without a
rope.'
`Rope!'  cried  Sam, talking wildly to himself  in  his  excitement and
relief. `Well, if I don't deserve  to be hung on the end of one as a warning
to numbskulls!  You're nowt  but a ninnyhammer, Sam Gamgee: that's  what
the
Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!'
`Stop  chattering!' cried  Frodo,  now  recovered  enough to feel  both
amused and annoyed. 'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself
you've got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it!
`Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and  all.  Carried it hundreds of miles and
I'd clean forgotten it!'
`Then get busy and let an end down!'
Quickly  Sam  unslung  his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the
bottom was a coil  of the silken-grey rope made by the folk  of  Lurien.  He
cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo's eyes, or
else his sight was returning. He could see the grey line as it came dangling
down, and he thought it had a faint silver sheen. Now that he had some point
in the darkness to  fix his eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning  his weight
forward, he made the  end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line
with both hands.
Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from
the edge.  Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up  and threw himself on
the ground.
Thunder growled  and  rumbled in the distance,  and the rain was  still
falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully; but  they did
not find  much shelter there.  Rills of water began  to run down;  soon they
grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the  stones, and spouted out over
the cliff like the gutters of a vast roof.
`I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,' said
Frodo. 'What a piece of luck you had that rope!'
`Better  luck  if  I'd thought  of  it sooner,'  said Sam.  'Maybe  you
remember them putting the  ropes in the boats,  as we started  off:  in  the
elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and  I stowed a coil in my pack. Years
ago, it seems.  "It may be a help in many needs," he said: Haldir, or one of
those folk. And he spoke right.'
`A  pity I didn't think of bringing another length,' said Frodo; `but I
left  the  Company in such a hurry and confusion. If  only  we had enough we
could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?'
Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: 'Five, ten, twenty,
thirty ells, more or less,' he said.
'Who'd have thought it!' Frodo exclaimed.
`Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. `Elves are wonderful folk. It looks  a  bit
thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the  hand. Packs close too, and as
light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!'
`Thirty ells! '  said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough.
If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.'
`The rain's nearly  given over already,'  said Sam;  'but  don't you go
doing anything risky in the  dim again, Mr.  Frodo! And I  haven't  got over
that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it  sounded-but
one up in the air, if they can fly.  I'm  thinking we'd  best lay up in this
crack till night's over.'
'And I'm  thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck
up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,'
said Frodo.
With  that he stood up and went  down to the bottom of the gully again.
He looked out.  Clear sky  was  growing in the East once more. The skirts of
the  storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the  main  battle had passed to
spread its great wings over the Emyn  Muil; upon which  the dark thought  of
Sauron brooded for a  while.  Thence it turned, smiting  the Vale of  Anduin
with hail  and lightning,  and  casting its shadow upon  Minas  Tirith  with
threat  of  war.  Then,  lowering in the mountains,  and gathering its great
spires,  it rolled on slowly over Gondor  and the skirts of Rohan, until far
away the Riders on  the plain saw its black towers moving behind the sun, as
they  rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the  reeking marshes
the  deep  blue sky of  evening  opened once  more, and  a few  pallid stars
appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon.
`It's good  to be able to see again,' said Frodo,  breathing  deep. `Do
you know, I thought for a  bit that I had lost my sight? From  the lightning
or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey
rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.'
`It does look  sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. `Never noticed it
before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed
it. But if you're so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo,  how  are you  going to use
it?  Thirty ells, or  say, about eighteen fathom: that's  no  more than your
guess at the height of the cliff.'
Frodo thought for a while. `Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ' he said.
