thirty ells, more or less,' he said.
'Who'd have thought it!' Frodo exclaimed.
`Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. `Elves are wonderful folk. It looks  a  bit
thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the  hand. Packs close too, and as
light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!'
`Thirty ells! '  said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough.
If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.'
`The rain's nearly  given over already,'  said Sam;  'but  don't you go
doing anything risky in the  dim again, Mr.  Frodo! And I  haven't  got over
that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it  sounded-but
one up in the air, if they can fly.  I'm  thinking we'd  best lay up in this
crack till night's over.'
'And I'm  thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck
up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,'
said Frodo.
With  that he stood up and went  down to the bottom of the gully again.
He looked out.  Clear sky  was  growing in the East once more. The skirts of
the  storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the  main  battle had passed to
spread its great wings over the Emyn  Muil; upon which  the dark thought  of
Sauron brooded for a  while.  Thence it turned, smiting  the Vale of  Anduin
with hail  and lightning,  and  casting its shadow upon  Minas  Tirith  with
threat  of  war.  Then,  lowering in the mountains,  and gathering its great
spires,  it rolled on slowly over Gondor  and the skirts of Rohan, until far
away the Riders on  the plain saw its black towers moving behind the sun, as
they  rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the  reeking marshes
the  deep  blue sky of  evening  opened once  more, and  a few  pallid stars
appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon.
`It's good  to be able to see again,' said Frodo,  breathing  deep. `Do
you know, I thought for a  bit that I had lost my sight? From  the lightning
or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey
rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.'
`It does look  sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. `Never noticed it
before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed
it. But if you're so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo,  how  are you  going to use
it?  Thirty ells, or  say, about eighteen fathom: that's  no  more than your
guess at the height of the cliff.'
Frodo thought for a while. `Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ' he said.
`Then I think  you  shall have your wish this time and go first. I'll  lower
you, and you need do no more than use  your feet and hands  to fend yourself
off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on  some of the ledges and give
me a  rest, it will help. When you're down, I'll follow. I feel quite myself
again now.'
'Very well,' said Sam heavily. `If it must be, let's get it  over! ' He
took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest  to the brink; then
the  other  end  he tied about  his own waist.  Reluctantly  he  turned  and
prepared to go over the edge a second time.
It did not, however, turn  out half as bad as he had expected. The rope
seemed  to give him confidence, though he  shut his eyes more than once when
he looked down between his feet. There was one awkward spot, where there
was
no ledge and the wall was sheer and even undercut for  a short  space; there
he slipped and  swung  out on the silver  line. But Frodo lowered him slowly
and steadily, and  it was over at  last. His  chief  fear had been  that the
rope-length would give out while he was still high up, but there was still a
good bight in Frodo's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: `I'm
down! ' His voice came up clearly from below,  but Frodo could not see  him;
his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight.
Frodo took rather  more time to follow him. He had the  rope  about his
waist and  it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that it  would pull
him up before  he  reached the ground; still he did not want to risk a fall,
and he had not quite  Sam's faith in  this  slender grey line.  He found two
places, all  the  same,  where he had to trust wholly to it: smooth surfaces
where there was no hold even  for  his strong hobbit  fingers and the ledges
were far apart. But at last he too was down.
`Well!' he cried. `We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And
now what next, I  wonder? Maybe we shall soon  be sighing for good hard rock
under foot again.'
But   Sam  did   not  answer:  he  was   staring  back  up  the  cliff.
`Ninnyhammers! ' he said. `Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to a
stump,  and  we're  at the  bottom.  Just  as  nice a little stair for  that
slinking Gollum as we could leave. Better put up a signpost to say which way
we've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.'
`If you can think of any way  we could have both used the rope and  yet
brought  it down with  us, then you  can  pass on to me ninnyhammer, or  any
other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. `Climb up and untie it and let
yourself down, if you want to!'
Sam scratched his head. `No,  I can't think how, begging  your pardon,'
he  said. `But I don't like leaving it, and that's  a fact.' He  stroked the
rope's  end  and  shook  it  gently.  `It goes  hard parting with anything I
brought  out  of  the  Elf-country. Made  by Galadriel herself, too,  maybe.
Galadriel,' he murmured  nodding his head  mournfully. He looked up and gave
one last pull to the rope as if in farewell.
To  the  complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam  fell
over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down  on top  of him. Frodo
laughed. `Who  tied the rope? ' he said. `A good thing it held as long as it
did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!'
Sam did not laugh. `I may not be much good at climbing, Mr.  Frodo,' he
said in injured tones, `but I do know something  about rope and about knots.
It's in the family, as you might  say. Why, my grand-dad, and my  uncle Andy
after him, him that  was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over
by Tighfield many a year.  And I put as fast a hitch  over the  stump as any
one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.'
`Then the rope must have broken  -- frayed on the rock-edge, I expect,'
said Frodo.
`I bet it didn't! ' said Sam in an  even more injured voice. He stooped
and examined the ends. `Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!'
'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo.
Sam shook his  head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through
his  fingers  thoughtfully. `Have it  your own way, Mr.  Frodo,' he  said at
last, `but I think the  rope came off itself -- when I called.' He coiled it
up and stowed it lovingly in his pack.
'It certainly came,' said Frodo, `and that's the  chief thing.  But now
we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful
the stars are, and the Moon!'
'They do cheer  the heart, don't they?  ' said Sam looking up.  'Elvish
they  are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't  seen him for a night
or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.'
'Yes,' said Frodo; `but he  won't be full for some  days. I don't think
we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.'
Under the first shadows of night they started  out on the next stage of
their journey. After  a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had
