other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. `Climb up and untie it and let
yourself down, if you want to!'
Sam scratched his head. `No,  I can't think how, begging  your pardon,'
he  said. `But I don't like leaving it, and that's  a fact.' He  stroked the
rope's  end  and  shook  it  gently.  `It goes  hard parting with anything I
brought  out  of  the  Elf-country. Made  by Galadriel herself, too,  maybe.
Galadriel,' he murmured  nodding his head  mournfully. He looked up and gave
one last pull to the rope as if in farewell.
To  the  complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam  fell
over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down  on top  of him. Frodo
laughed. `Who  tied the rope? ' he said. `A good thing it held as long as it
did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!'
Sam did not laugh. `I may not be much good at climbing, Mr.  Frodo,' he
said in injured tones, `but I do know something  about rope and about knots.
It's in the family, as you might  say. Why, my grand-dad, and my  uncle Andy
after him, him that  was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over
by Tighfield many a year.  And I put as fast a hitch  over the  stump as any
one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.'
`Then the rope must have broken  -- frayed on the rock-edge, I expect,'
said Frodo.
`I bet it didn't! ' said Sam in an  even more injured voice. He stooped
and examined the ends. `Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!'
'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo.
Sam shook his  head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through
his  fingers  thoughtfully. `Have it  your own way, Mr.  Frodo,' he  said at
last, `but I think the  rope came off itself -- when I called.' He coiled it
up and stowed it lovingly in his pack.
'It certainly came,' said Frodo, `and that's the  chief thing.  But now
we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful
the stars are, and the Moon!'
'They do cheer  the heart, don't they?  ' said Sam looking up.  'Elvish
they  are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't  seen him for a night
or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.'
'Yes,' said Frodo; `but he  won't be full for some  days. I don't think
we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.'
Under the first shadows of night they started  out on the next stage of
their journey. After  a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had
come. The mouth  of the gully was a black notch in the  dim cliff. `I'm glad
we've got  the rope,' he said. 'We've set a little puzzle for  that footpad,
anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!'
They  picked  their  steps away from the  skirts of the cliff,  among a
wilderness of boulders  and  rough stones, wet  and slippery with the  heavy
rain.  The ground still fell  away  sharply. They had not gone very far when
they came upon a great fissure that yawned suddenly black before their feet.
It was not wide,  but it was too wide to  jump across in the dim light. They
thought they  could hear water  gurgling in  its  depths. It curved away  on
their  left  northward, back  towards the hills. and so barred their road in
that direction, at any rate while darkness lasted.
'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I
think,'  said  Sam.  `We might  find some  nook  there, or  even  a cave  or
something.'
'I  suppose so,'  said  Frodo.  'I'm tired.  and  I don't  think I  can
scramble among stones much  longer tonight --  though  I grudge the delay. I
wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I'd go on till my legs gave
way.'
They did not find the going  any easier at the  broken feet of the Emyn
Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook  or hollow  to shelter in: only  bare  stony
slopes frowned  over  by the  cliff, which  now rose again, higher  and more
sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they  just cast themselves on
the ground  under the lee  of a boulder lying not far  from the foot of  the
precipice. There  for some time  they sat huddled mournfully together in the
cold stony night, while sleep crept  upon them in spite of all they could do
to hold it off.  The moon now rode high and  clear. Its thin white light lit
up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff,
turning  all the wide  looming darkness into a  chill  pale grey scored with
black shadows.
'Well! '  said  Frodo, standing up and drawing  his cloak more  closely
round him.  `You  sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket.  I'll walk up and
down on sentry for a while.' Suddenly he stiffened,  and stooping he gripped
Sam by the  arm. `What's  that?  '  he whispered. `Look  over  there on  the
cliff!'
Sam looked and breathed in  sharply through his teeth. `Ssss!' he said.
'That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to think that I
thought that  we'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at  him!  Like a
nasty crawling spider on a wall.'
Down the face of a precipice, sheer  and almost smooth it seemed in the
pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin  limbs  splayed
out. Maybe its soft clinging  hands and toes were finding crevices and holds
that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just
creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind.
And it was coming down  head  first, as  if it was smelling its way. Now and
again it lifted its head slowly, turning  it  right back on  its long skinny
neck, and the hobbits  caught  a glimpse of two small pale gleaming  lights,
its eyes that blinked at the moon  for a moment and then were quickly lidded
again.
`Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam.
`I don't know,' said Frodo  quietly, `but I think not. It  is hard even
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot  see you in the shadow
even at a few paces. And I've heard that he doesn't like Sun or Moon.'
`Then why is he coming down just here? ' asked Sam.
'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. `He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear
as keen as  Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something now: our voices
probably. We did a lot of shouting  away back there; and we were talking far
too loudly until a minute ago.'
`Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. `He's come once too often for me and
I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't suppose  we  could give
him the slip  now anyway.' Drawing his grey  hood well  over  his  face, Sam
crept stealthily towards the cliff.
`Careful!' whispered Frodo coming behind.  `Don't  alarm him! He's much
more dangerous than he looks.'
The black crawling shape was now three-quarters  of  the way down,  and
perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's  foot. Crouching stone-still in
the shadow of a large  boulder the hobbits watched him.  He seemed  to  have
come  to a  difficult passage or  to be troubled about something. They could
hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh  hiss of breath that
sounded like  a curse. He lifted his head, and they  thought  they heard him
spit. Then  he  moved on again. Now they could hear  his voice creaking  and
whistling.
`Ach,  sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste  less speed.  We musstn't
rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious  --               gollum   !'  He lifted his
head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. `We hate it,' he
