nasty crawling spider on a wall.'
Down the face of a precipice, sheer  and almost smooth it seemed in the
pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin  limbs  splayed
out. Maybe its soft clinging  hands and toes were finding crevices and holds
that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just
creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind.
And it was coming down  head  first, as  if it was smelling its way. Now and
again it lifted its head slowly, turning  it  right back on  its long skinny
neck, and the hobbits  caught  a glimpse of two small pale gleaming  lights,
its eyes that blinked at the moon  for a moment and then were quickly lidded
again.
`Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam.
`I don't know,' said Frodo  quietly, `but I think not. It  is hard even
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot  see you in the shadow
even at a few paces. And I've heard that he doesn't like Sun or Moon.'
`Then why is he coming down just here? ' asked Sam.
'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. `He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear
as keen as  Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something now: our voices
probably. We did a lot of shouting  away back there; and we were talking far
too loudly until a minute ago.'
`Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. `He's come once too often for me and
I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't suppose  we  could give
him the slip  now anyway.' Drawing his grey  hood well  over  his  face, Sam
crept stealthily towards the cliff.
`Careful!' whispered Frodo coming behind.  `Don't  alarm him! He's much
more dangerous than he looks.'
The black crawling shape was now three-quarters  of  the way down,  and
perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's  foot. Crouching stone-still in
the shadow of a large  boulder the hobbits watched him.  He seemed  to  have
come  to a  difficult passage or  to be troubled about something. They could
hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh  hiss of breath that
sounded like  a curse. He lifted his head, and they  thought  they heard him
spit. Then  he  moved on again. Now they could hear  his voice creaking  and
whistling.
`Ach,  sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste  less speed.  We musstn't
rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious  --               gollum   !'  He lifted his
head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. `We hate it,' he
hissed.  `Nassty,  nassty shivery light it is  -- sss  --  it  spies on  us,
precious -- it hurts our eyes.'
He was getting  lower now and the  hisses became  sharper  and clearer.
'Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours, it is, and
we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the filthy  little thieves. Where are
they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.'
`It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? ' whispered Sam.
`And what's his Precious? Does he mean the'
`Hsh!  ' breathed  Frodo. 'He's getting near now, near enough to hear a
whisper.'
Indeed Gollum  had suddenly paused again,  and his  large  head on  its
scrawny neck was  lolling from side to side as if he was listening. His pale
eyes were  half  unlidded. Sam restrained  himself, though his fingers  were
twitching. His  eyes,  filled with anger  and  disgust,  were  fixed  on the
wretched  creature as  he  now  began  to  move again,  still whispering and
hissing to himself.
At last he was no more than a  dozen  feet from the ground, right above
their  heads. From that  point  there  was a sheer  drop, for  the cliff was
slightly undercut,  and  even Gollum could not find a hold of any  kind.  He
seemed to be trying to twist round, so  as to go legs  first, when  suddenly
with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did so, he curled his legs and
arms up round him, like a spider whose descending thread is snapped.
Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the  space between him
and the cliff foot in  a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get up, he was
on top of him.  But he  found Gollum more than he bargained for, even  taken
like that,  suddenly, off  his guard after  a  fall. Before Sam  could get a
hold, long legs  and arms  were  wound round  him  pinning  his  arms, and a
clinging grip, soft  but  horribly  strong, was  squeezing  him  like slowly
tightening  cords;  clammy fingers were feeling for  his throat.  Then sharp
teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head
sideways into  the creature's face. Gollum hissed and spat, but  he did  not
let go.
Things  would have gone  ill with  Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo
sprang  up, and drew  Sting from its sheath. With his left hand he drew back
Gollum's head by his thin lank hair, stretching  his long neck, and  forcing
his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky.
`Let go! Gollum,' he said. `This is Sting. You have seen it before once
upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll cut your throat.'
Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering
his  shoulder.  His eyes  smouldered  with  anger, but  he could  not avenge
himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering.
`Don't hurt  us! Don't let them hurt us,  precious! They won't hurt  us
will they, nice little hobbitses?  We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on
us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely,                  gollum   .
We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be  nice to  us, won't we, yes,
yess.'
`Well, what's to be done with it? '  said  Sam.  `Tie  it up, so  as it
can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.'
`But  that would kill  us, kill  us,'  whimpered  Gollum. `Cruel little
,
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands  and leave us,                gollum gollum      .'
Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat.
`No,'  said Frodo. `If we kill him, we  must kill him outright. But  we
can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.'
`Oh hasn't  he! ' said Sam rubbing his  shoulder.  `Anyway he meant to,
and   he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that's his plan.'
'I daresay,' said Frodo. `But what he means  to  do is another matter.'
He paused for  a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering.
Sam stood glowering over him.
It seemed  to Frodo  then  that he  heard,  quite  plainly but far off,
voices out of the past:
What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance!
Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and  Mercy: not to strike
without need.
I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death.
Deserves  death! I daresay  he does. Many that live  deserve death. And
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager
to  deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even
the wise cannot see all ends.
`Very well,' he answered aloud, lowering  his  sword. 'But  still  I am
afraid. And yet, as you see,  I will not touch  the creature. For now that I
see him, I do pity him.'
Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was
not there. Gollum lifted his head.
'Yess,  wretched we are,  precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits
