upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll cut your throat.'
Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering
his  shoulder.  His eyes  smouldered  with  anger, but  he could  not avenge
himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering.
`Don't hurt  us! Don't let them hurt us,  precious! They won't hurt  us
will they, nice little hobbitses?  We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on
us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely,                  gollum   .
We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be  nice to  us, won't we, yes,
yess.'
`Well, what's to be done with it? '  said  Sam.  `Tie  it up, so  as it
can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.'
`But  that would kill  us, kill  us,'  whimpered  Gollum. `Cruel little
,
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands  and leave us,                gollum gollum      .'
Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat.
`No,'  said Frodo. `If we kill him, we  must kill him outright. But  we
can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.'
`Oh hasn't  he! ' said Sam rubbing his  shoulder.  `Anyway he meant to,
and   he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that's his plan.'
'I daresay,' said Frodo. `But what he means  to  do is another matter.'
He paused for  a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering.
Sam stood glowering over him.
It seemed  to Frodo  then  that he  heard,  quite  plainly but far off,
voices out of the past:
What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance!
Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and  Mercy: not to strike
without need.
I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death.
Deserves  death! I daresay  he does. Many that live  deserve death. And
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager
to  deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even
the wise cannot see all ends.
`Very well,' he answered aloud, lowering  his  sword. 'But  still  I am
afraid. And yet, as you see,  I will not touch  the creature. For now that I
see him, I do pity him.'
Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was
not there. Gollum lifted his head.
'Yess,  wretched we are,  precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits
won't kill us, nice hobbits.'
'No,  we won't,'  said Frodo. `But we won't  let you go, either. You're
full  of  wickedness and  mischief, Gollum. You will  have to come with  us,
that's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if  you  can.
One good turn deserves another.'
'Yess, yes indeed,' said Gollum sitting up. 'Nice hobbits! We will come
with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And where are they
going in these cold hard  lands, we  wonders, yes we wonders? ' He looked up
at them, and a faint  light of cunning  and eagerness flickered for a second
in his pale blinking eyes.
Sam scowled at him,  and sucked his  teeth; but he seemed to sense that
there was  something  odd  about his master's  mood and that the  matter was
beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo's reply.
Frodo  looked straight into Gollum's eyes  which  flinched  and twisted
away. `You know that, or  you guess  well enough, Smjagol,' he said. quietly
and sternly. `We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there,
I believe.'
`Ach! sss! ' said Gollum, covering his  ears with his hands, as if such
frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. `We guessed, yes we
guessed,' he  whispered;  `and we didn't  want  them  to  go,  did  we?  No,
precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and dust, and thirst there is;
and pits, pits, pits, and Orcs, thousands of Orcses. Nice hobbits mustn't go
to -- sss -- those places.'
`So you have been there? ' Frodo insisted. `And you're being drawn back
there, aren't you?'
`Yess. Yess. No! ' shrieked Gollum. `Once, by  accident it  was, wasn't
it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won't go back, no, no!' Then suddenly
his voice and language changed,  and he sobbed in his throat,  and spoke but
not to them. `Leave me alone,          gollum   ! You hurt me.  O my poor hands,            gollum   !
I,  we, I don't want  to come back. I can't find it. I am tired. I, we can't
,
find it,  gollum gollum      ,  no, nowhere. They're always awake.  Dwarves,  Men,
and Elves, terrible Elves  with  bright eyes. I can't find it. Ach! ' He got
up and clenched his long hand into a bony fleshless knot, shaking it towards
the East. 'We  won't! ' he  cried. 'Not for  you.' Then he collapsed  again.
,
' Gollum gollum      ,' he whimpered with his face  to the  ground. 'Don't look at
us! Go away! Go to sleep!'
`He will not go  away or go to sleep at  your  command, Smjagol,'  said
Frodo. `But if you  really wish to be free of  him again. then you must help
me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go
all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.'
Gollum sat up  again  and looked at him under  his eyelids. 'He's  over
there,' he cackled. `Always there. Orcs  will take you all the  way. Easy to
find Orcs east of  the River. Don't ask Smjagol. Poor, poor Smjagol, he went
away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.'
`Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo.
'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum.
'Get up! ' said Frodo.
Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff.
`Now! '  said Frodo. 'Can  you find  a path easier by day or by  night?
We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll start tonight.'
`The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. `Not  under the
White  Face, not  yet. It will go behind  the  hills soon, yess. Rest  a bit
first, nice hobbits!'
`Then sit down,' said Frodo, `and don't move!'
The  hobbits  seated themselves  beside  him, one on  either side. with
their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need for any
arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly
the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before
them. The stars grew thick  and bright in  the sky  above.  No one  stirred.
Gollum  sat  with his legs drawn up, knees  under chin, flat hands  and feet
splayed on the ground,  his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking
or listening.
Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and  they  understood.  They
relaxed,  leaning  their heads back, and  shutting their eyes or seeming to.
Soon  the sound of  their  soft  breathing  could be  heard. Gollum's  hands
twitched  a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved  to  the left  and the
right, and  first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made
no sign.
Suddenly,  with startling agility and  speed, straight  off  the ground
with a jump like a  grasshopper or a frog. Gollum  bounded  forward into the
darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected.  Sam was on
him
before he had gone two paces after  his spring. Frodo coming behind  grabbed
his leg and threw him.
