And though we pass them by today,
Tomorrow we may come this way
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun.
Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,
Let them go! Let them go!
Sand and stone and pool and dell,
Fare you well! Fare you well!
Home is behind, the world ahead,
And there are many paths to tread
Through shadows to the edge of night,
Until the stars are all alight.
Then world behind and home ahead,
We'll wander back to home and bed.
Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,
Away shall fade! Away shall fade!
Fire and lamp, and meat and bread,
And then to bed! And then to bed!
The song ended. 'And        now   to bed! And     now   to bed!' sang Pippin in a high
voice.
'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.'
They slopped suddenly  and  stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening.
There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but coming slow and
clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and  ran
into the deeper shade under the oak-trees.
'Don't let  us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I
want to see if it is another Black Rider.'
'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!'
The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better
than the general  darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a
large tree-bole, while  Frodo  crept back a few yards  towards  the lane. It
showed grey and pale, a line  of fading light through the wood. Above it the
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon.
The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass
across  the lighter  space between two trees, and then halt. It looked  like
the  black shade of a horse led by a smaller black  shadow. The black shadow
stood close  to the point where they had left the  path, and it  swayed from
side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snuffling. The shadow bent
to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him.
Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time
it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before he  realized what
he was  doing, his hand was groping  in his pocket. But at that moment there
came  a sound  like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in
the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated.  It climbed
on to the  shadowy  horse  and  seemed  to  vanish  across the lane into the
darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again.
'Elves!' exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. 'Elves, sir!' He would have
burst  out of the trees and dashed off towards  the voices, if they  had not
pulled him back.
'Yes,  it  is Elves,' said  Frodo. 'One can meet them sometimes  in the
Woody End.  They don't live in the Shire, but they  wander into it in Spring
and  Autumn,  out  of their own  lands away  beyond the  Tower Hills.  I  am
thankful that they do! You did not  see, but  that Black  Rider stopped just
here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he
heard the voices he slipped away.'
'What  about the Elves?'  said  Sam, too  excited  to trouble about the
rider. 'Can't we go and see them?'
'Listen! They are coming this way,' said Frodo. 'We have only to wait.'
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above  the others.  It was
singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the
others knew nothing. Yet  the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape
itself  in their thought into words which they only partly understood.  This
was the song as Frodo heard it:
Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!
O Queen beyond the Western Seas!
O Light to us that wander here
Amid the world of woven trees!
Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!
Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath!
Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee
In a far land beyond the Sea.
O stars that in the Sunless Year
With shining hand by her were sawn,
In windy fields now bright and clear
We see your silver blossom blown!
O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees,
Thy starlight on the Western Seas.
The  song  ended.  'These  are High  Elves!  They  spoke  the  name  of
Elbereth!' said Frodo in amazement,  'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen
in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth,  east  of the  Great Sea.
This is indeed a strange chance!'
The hobbits  sat in shadow  by the wayside. Before long the Elves  came
down the lane towards the valley. They  passed slowly, and the hobbits could
see the starlight glimmering on their hair and  in their  eyes. They bore no
lights,  yet as they walked a  shimmer, like the light of the moon above the
rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were
now silent, and  as the last Elf  passed  he turned  and looked  towards the
hobbits and laughed.
'Hail,  Frodo!' he  cried. 'You  are  abroad  late. Or are  you perhaps
lost?'  Then he called aloud  to the others, and all the company stopped and
gathered round.
'This  is indeed  wonderful!'  they  said. 'Three hobbits in  a wood at
night! We  have not seen  such a thing  since Bilbo went away.  What is  the
meaning of it?'
'The meaning of it, fair people,'  said Frodo, 'is simply that  we seem
to be going the same  way as you are. I like  walking under the stars. But I
would welcome your company.'
'But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are  so  dull,' they
laughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do
not
know whither we are going?'
'And how do you know my name?' asked Frodo in return.
'We know many things,'  they said. 'We have seen you often before  with
Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.'
'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo.
