Frodo. `But if you  really wish to be free of  him again. then you must help
me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go
all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.'
Gollum sat up  again  and looked at him under  his eyelids. 'He's  over
there,' he cackled. `Always there. Orcs  will take you all the  way. Easy to
find Orcs east of  the River. Don't ask Smjagol. Poor, poor Smjagol, he went
away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.'
`Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo.
'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum.
'Get up! ' said Frodo.
Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff.
`Now! '  said Frodo. 'Can  you find  a path easier by day or by  night?
We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll start tonight.'
`The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. `Not  under the
White  Face, not  yet. It will go behind  the  hills soon, yess. Rest  a bit
first, nice hobbits!'
`Then sit down,' said Frodo, `and don't move!'
The  hobbits  seated themselves  beside  him, one on  either side. with
their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need for any
arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly
the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before
them. The stars grew thick  and bright in  the sky  above.  No one  stirred.
Gollum  sat  with his legs drawn up, knees  under chin, flat hands  and feet
splayed on the ground,  his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking
or listening.
Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and  they  understood.  They
relaxed,  leaning  their heads back, and  shutting their eyes or seeming to.
Soon  the sound of  their  soft  breathing  could be  heard. Gollum's  hands
twitched  a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved  to  the left  and the
right, and  first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made
no sign.
Suddenly,  with startling agility and  speed, straight  off  the ground
with a jump like a  grasshopper or a frog. Gollum  bounded  forward into the
darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected.  Sam was on
him
before he had gone two paces after  his spring. Frodo coming behind  grabbed
his leg and threw him.
'Your rope might prove useful again, Sam.' he said.
Sam  got  out the  rope. 'And  where were you  off  to in the cold hard
lands, Mr. Gollum?' he growled. 'We wonders.  aye,  we wonders. To find
some
of  your orc-friends,  I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It's round
your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.'
Gollum lay quiet and tried  no further tricks.  He did not  answer Sam,
but gave him a swift venomous look.
`All we need is something to keep a hold on him,' said Frodo. 'We  want
him  to walk, so it's  no good  tying his legs-or his arms. he seems to  use
them nearly as much. Tie one end to his  ankle, and keep a grip on the other
end.'
He  stood over Gollum, while Sam  tied the  knot. The  result surprised
them both. Gollum  began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very  horrible to
hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his ankle and bite the rope.
He kept on screaming.
At last Frodo was  convinced that  he really was  in pain; but it could
not be from the knot. He examined it  and found that  it was not too  tight,
indeed  hardly  tight  enough. Sam was gentler than his words.  'What's  the
matter with you? ' he said. `If you will try to run away. you must  be tied;
but we don't wish to hurt you.'
'It hurts us, it hurts us,' hissed Gollum. `It freezes, it bites! Elves
twisted it,  curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we tries to escape,
of course  it is, precious.  We guessed they were cruel hobbits. They visits
Elves, fierce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts us.'
`No, I will not take it off you,' said Frodo, `not unless' -- he paused
a  moment in thought -- `not unless there is any promise you can make that I
can trust.'
'We  will swear to  do what he wants,  yes, yess,  said  Gollum,  still
twisting and grabbling at his ankle. `It hurts us.'
`Swear? ' said Frodo.
'Smjagol,' said  Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and
staring at Frodo with a strange light. 'Smjagol will swear on the Precious.'
Frodo drew himself up, and again  Sam was startled by his words and his
stern voice. 'On the Precious? How dare you? ' he said. 'Think!
One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them.
Would you  commit your promise to that, Smjagol? It  will hold you. But
it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!'
Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious. on the Precious! ' he repeated.
`And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo.
`To be very very good,' said Gollum.  Then crawling to Frodo's  feet he
grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the
words shook his very  bones with fear. 'Smjagol will swear never,  never, to
let Him  have  it.  Never! Smjagol will save  it. But  he  must swear on the
Precious.'
'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking  down at him with stern pity. 'All
you wish is  to see it and touch it, if  you can,  though you know  it would
drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it,  if you  will. For you know  where it
is. Yes, you know, Smjagol. It is before you.'
For  a moment it appeared to Sam that  his master had  grown and Gollum
had shrunk: a  tall stern shadow, a mighty lord  who hid  his  brightness in
grey cloud, and at his feet  a little whining  dog. Yet the two were in some
way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's  minds. Gollum raised
himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees.
'Down! down! ' said Frodo. `Now speak your promise!'
`We promises, yes I promise!' said Gollum. 'I will serve the  master of
,
the Precious. Good master, good Smjagol,               gollum gollum      !' Suddenly he  began
to weep and bite at his ankle again.
'Take the rope off, Sam!' said Frodo.
Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about,
like a whipped cur  whose master  has patted it. From  that moment a change,
which lasted for some time,  came over him. He spoke  with less  hissing and
whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He
would  cringe and  flinch,  if  they stepped  near  him or  made any  sudden
movement,  and  he  avoided  the  touch of  their elven-cloaks; but  he  was
friendly,  and  indeed pitifully anxious  to  please.  He would cackle  with
laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even  if Frodo  spoke kindly to
him, and weep if Frodo rebuked  him. Sam said little to  him of any sort. He
suspected him more  deeply than ever,  and if possible liked the new Gollum,
the Smjagol, less than the old.
'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he  said. 'now for
it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start.'
'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one
way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found it, I  did. Orcs
