it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!'
Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious. on the Precious! ' he repeated.
`And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo.
`To be very very good,' said Gollum.  Then crawling to Frodo's  feet he
grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the
words shook his very  bones with fear. 'Smjagol will swear never,  never, to
let Him  have  it.  Never! Smjagol will save  it. But  he  must swear on the
Precious.'
'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking  down at him with stern pity. 'All
you wish is  to see it and touch it, if  you can,  though you know  it would
drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it,  if you  will. For you know  where it
is. Yes, you know, Smjagol. It is before you.'
For  a moment it appeared to Sam that  his master had  grown and Gollum
had shrunk: a  tall stern shadow, a mighty lord  who hid  his  brightness in
grey cloud, and at his feet  a little whining  dog. Yet the two were in some
way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's  minds. Gollum raised
himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees.
'Down! down! ' said Frodo. `Now speak your promise!'
`We promises, yes I promise!' said Gollum. 'I will serve the  master of
,
the Precious. Good master, good Smjagol,               gollum gollum      !' Suddenly he  began
to weep and bite at his ankle again.
'Take the rope off, Sam!' said Frodo.
Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about,
like a whipped cur  whose master  has patted it. From  that moment a change,
which lasted for some time,  came over him. He spoke  with less  hissing and
whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He
would  cringe and  flinch,  if  they stepped  near  him or  made any  sudden
movement,  and  he  avoided  the  touch of  their elven-cloaks; but  he  was
friendly,  and  indeed pitifully anxious  to  please.  He would cackle  with
laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even  if Frodo  spoke kindly to
him, and weep if Frodo rebuked  him. Sam said little to  him of any sort. He
suspected him more  deeply than ever,  and if possible liked the new Gollum,
the Smjagol, less than the old.
'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he  said. 'now for
it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start.'
'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one
way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found it, I  did. Orcs
don't use it,  Orcs  don't know  it.  Orcs don't cross the  Marshes, they go
round for miles and  miles. Very  lucky  you  came  this way. Very lucky you
found Smjagol, yes. Follow Smjagol!'
He took  a few  steps away  and  looked  back  inquiringly,  like a dog
inviting  them for  a  walk. 'Wait a bit, Gollum!'  cried Sam. `Not too  far
ahead now! I'm going to be at your tail, and I've got the rope handy.'
'No, no! ' said Gollum. 'Smjagol promised.'
In the  deep of night under hard  clear stars they set  off. Gollum led
them back northward for a while along the way they had come; then he slanted
to  the right away from  the steep edge  of the Emyn Muil,  down  the broken
stony slopes towards the vast fens below. They faded swiftly and softly into
the darkness. Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there
was a black silence.
Chapter 2. The Passage of the Marshes
Gollum moved  quickly,  with his  head and  neck  thrust forward, often
using  his hands as well as his feet. Frodo  and  Sam were hard put to it to
keep up with  him; but he seemed  no longer to have any thought of escaping,
and if they fell  behind, he  would turn and wait for  them. After a time he
brought  them to the brink of the narrow gully that they  had struck before;
but they were now further from the hills.
`Here it  is!'  he cried.  'There is  a  way down inside, yes.  Now  we
follows it -- out,  out away over there.' He pointed south and east  towards
the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy and foul even in
the cool night air. .
Gollum  cast up and down along the  brink,  and at length he  called to
them.  `Here! We can get down here. Smjagol went  this way once: I went this
way, hiding from Orcs.'
He led the way, and following him  the  hobbits climbed  down into  the
gloom. It  was  not difficult,  for  the  rift was at this  point only  some
fifteen feet deep and about  a dozen across. There  was running water at the
bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled
down  from the  hills to feed  the  stagnant pools and mires beyond.  Gollum
turned to the  right, southward  more  or less, and splashed  along with his
feet in the  shallow  stony stream. He seemed greatly  delighted to feel the
water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes even croaking in a sort of song.
The cold hard lands,
they bites our hands,
they gnaws our feet.
The rocks and stones
are like old bones
all bare of meat.
But stream and pool
is wet and cool:
so nice for feet!
And now we wish --
'Ha! ha! What does we wish?' he said,  looking sidelong at the hobbits.
'We'll tell you.' he croaked. `He  guessed it long ago, Baggins guessed it.'
A glint  came  into his  eyes, and Sam  catching the gleam in  the  darkness
