Chapter 2. The Passage of the Marshes
Gollum moved  quickly,  with his  head and  neck  thrust forward, often
using  his hands as well as his feet. Frodo  and  Sam were hard put to it to
keep up with  him; but he seemed  no longer to have any thought of escaping,
and if they fell  behind, he  would turn and wait for  them. After a time he
brought  them to the brink of the narrow gully that they  had struck before;
but they were now further from the hills.
`Here it  is!'  he cried.  'There is  a  way down inside, yes.  Now  we
follows it -- out,  out away over there.' He pointed south and east  towards
the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy and foul even in
the cool night air. .
Gollum  cast up and down along the  brink,  and at length he  called to
them.  `Here! We can get down here. Smjagol went  this way once: I went this
way, hiding from Orcs.'
He led the way, and following him  the  hobbits climbed  down into  the
gloom. It  was  not difficult,  for  the  rift was at this  point only  some
fifteen feet deep and about  a dozen across. There  was running water at the
bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled
down  from the  hills to feed  the  stagnant pools and mires beyond.  Gollum
turned to the  right, southward  more  or less, and splashed  along with his
feet in the  shallow  stony stream. He seemed greatly  delighted to feel the
water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes even croaking in a sort of song.
The cold hard lands,
they bites our hands,
they gnaws our feet.
The rocks and stones
are like old bones
all bare of meat.
But stream and pool
is wet and cool:
so nice for feet!
And now we wish --
'Ha! ha! What does we wish?' he said,  looking sidelong at the hobbits.
'We'll tell you.' he croaked. `He  guessed it long ago, Baggins guessed it.'
A glint  came  into his  eyes, and Sam  catching the gleam in  the  darkness
thought it far from pleasant.
Alive without breath;
as cold as death;
never thirsting, ever drinking;
clad in mail, never clinking.
Drowns on dry land,
thinks an island
is a mountain;
thinks a fountain
is a puff of air.
So sleek, so fair!
What a joy to meet!
We only wish
to catch a fish,
so juicy-sweet!
These  words only made  more pressing to Sam's mind a problem that  had
been  troubling him  from the moment when he  understood that hir master was
going  to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem of food. It  did not occur to
him that his master might also  have thought of  it. hut he  supposed Gollum
had.  Indeed how had Gollum kept  himself  in all his lonely wandering? 'Not
too well,'  thought Sam. 'He looks fair famished. Not too dainty to try what
hobbit tastes like  if there ain't  no  fish, I'll wager -- supposing  as he
could catch us napping. Well, he won't: not Sam Gamgee for one.'
They stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time, or so it
seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam. The gully turned eastward, and as
they went on it broadened and got gradually shallower. At last the sky above
grew faint with the  first  grey  of morning. Gollum  had shown  no signs of
tiring, but now he looked up and halted.
`Day  is near,'  he whispered,  as  if  Day  was  something  that might
overhear  him and spring on  him. `Smjagol will stay here: I will stay here,
and the Yellow Face won't see me.'
`We should be glad to see the Sun;' said Frodo, `but we will stay here:
we are too tired to go any further at present.'
`You are not  wise  to  be glad of the  Yellow Face,' said  Gollum. `It
shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Smjagol. Orcs and nasty things
are about. They can see a long way. Stay and hide with me! '
The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky wall of
the gully.  It was not much more than a  tall man's  height now,  and at its
base there were wide flat shelves  of dry stone; the water ran in a  channel
on  the  other side. Frodo and Sam sat  on one of  the  flats, resting their
backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream.
`We must  take a little food,' said Frodo. `Are you hungry, Smjagol? We
have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.'
At the word    hungry    a greenish light  was kindled in Gollum's pale eyes,
and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his thin sickly face. For
a  moment  he  relapsed into his old  Gollum-manner. 'We are famisshed,  yes
famisshed we are. precious,' he  said. `What is it they eats? Have they nice
fisshes? ' His tongue lolled out between his sharp yellow teeth. licking his
colourless lips.
`No, we have  got no fish,' said Frodo. `We have only  got this'  -- he
held up a wafer of      lembas    -- 'and water, if the water here is fit to drink.'
`Yess,  yess,  nice water,' said  Gollum. `Drink it, drink it, while we
can! But what is it they've got, precious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty? '
Frodo  broke  off a portion  of a wafer  and handed it  to him  on  its
leaf-wrapping. Gollum  sniffed at the leaf and  his face changed: a spasm of
disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. `Smjagol smells it! ' he
said. `Leaves out of the elf-country,  gah! They stinks. He climbed in those
trees,  and  he  couldn't  wash  the  smell  off  his hands, my nice hands.'
Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the             lembas     and nibbled it. He spat,
and a fit of coughing shook him.
`Ach! No!  '  he spluttered. `You try to  choke poor Smjagol.  Dust and
ashes, he can't eat that. He must  starve. But  Smjagol  doesn't  mind. Nice
hobbits! Smjagol has promised.  He will  starve. He can't eat hobbits' food.
He will starve. Poor thin Smjagol! '
`I'm sorry,' said Frodo; `but I can't help  you, I'm  afraid.  I  think
this  food would do you good, if  you would try. But perhaps  you can't even
try, not yet anyway.'
The hobbits munched their         lembas    in silence. Sam thought that it tasted
far better, somehow, than  it had for a  good while: Gollum's behaviour  had
made him  attend to its flavour  again.  But  he did  not  feel comfortable.
Gollum  watched every morsel from  hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a
diner's  chair. Only  when they had finished and were preparing to rest, was
he apparently convinced that they had no hidden dainties that he could share
in. Then he went and sat by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little.
