the gully.  It was not much more than a  tall man's  height now,  and at its
base there were wide flat shelves  of dry stone; the water ran in a  channel
on  the  other side. Frodo and Sam sat  on one of  the  flats, resting their
backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream.
`We must  take a little food,' said Frodo. `Are you hungry, Smjagol? We
have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.'
At the word    hungry    a greenish light  was kindled in Gollum's pale eyes,
and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his thin sickly face. For
a  moment  he  relapsed into his old  Gollum-manner. 'We are famisshed,  yes
famisshed we are. precious,' he  said. `What is it they eats? Have they nice
fisshes? ' His tongue lolled out between his sharp yellow teeth. licking his
colourless lips.
`No, we have  got no fish,' said Frodo. `We have only  got this'  -- he
held up a wafer of      lembas    -- 'and water, if the water here is fit to drink.'
`Yess,  yess,  nice water,' said  Gollum. `Drink it, drink it, while we
can! But what is it they've got, precious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty? '
Frodo  broke  off a portion  of a wafer  and handed it  to him  on  its
leaf-wrapping. Gollum  sniffed at the leaf and  his face changed: a spasm of
disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. `Smjagol smells it! ' he
said. `Leaves out of the elf-country,  gah! They stinks. He climbed in those
trees,  and  he  couldn't  wash  the  smell  off  his hands, my nice hands.'
Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the             lembas     and nibbled it. He spat,
and a fit of coughing shook him.
`Ach! No!  '  he spluttered. `You try to  choke poor Smjagol.  Dust and
ashes, he can't eat that. He must  starve. But  Smjagol  doesn't  mind. Nice
hobbits! Smjagol has promised.  He will  starve. He can't eat hobbits' food.
He will starve. Poor thin Smjagol! '
`I'm sorry,' said Frodo; `but I can't help  you, I'm  afraid.  I  think
this  food would do you good, if  you would try. But perhaps  you can't even
try, not yet anyway.'
The hobbits munched their         lembas    in silence. Sam thought that it tasted
far better, somehow, than  it had for a  good while: Gollum's behaviour  had
made him  attend to its flavour  again.  But  he did  not  feel comfortable.
Gollum  watched every morsel from  hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a
diner's  chair. Only  when they had finished and were preparing to rest, was
he apparently convinced that they had no hidden dainties that he could share
in. Then he went and sat by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little.
'Look here! ' Sam whispered to Frodo, not too softly: he did not really
care whether Gollum heard him or  not. `We've got to get some sleep; but not
both together with that hungry villain nigh, promise or no  promise. Smjagol
or Gollum,  he won't change  his habits in a hurry, I'll warrant. You  go to
sleep, Mr. Frodo, and I'll call you when I can't keep my eyelids propped up.
Turn and about, same as before, while he's loose.'
is
'Perhaps you're right, Sam,'  said Frodo  speaking openly. 'There    a
change  in him, but  just what kind of a change  and  how deep, I'm not sure
yet.  Seriously though,  I  don't think  there is any  need  for fear --  at
present.  Still watch if you wish.  Give me about  two hours, not more,  and
then call me.'
So  tired was Frodo that his head  fell forward  on his  breast  and he
slept. almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed no longer to
have any fears. He curled  up and  went quickly to sleep, quite unconcerned.
Presently his breath was hissing softly through his clenched  teeth,  hut he
lay still as stone.  After a while, fearing that he would  drop off himself,
if he sat listening  to his two companions breathing, Sam  got up and gently
prodded  Gollum.  His  hands  uncurled  and  twitched, but he made  no other
movement.  Sam bent  down and said               fissh  close to his ear, but there was  no
response, not even a catch in Gollum's breathing.
Sam scratched his head. `Must really be asleep,' he muttered. `And if I
was  like Gollum,  he wouldn't  wake up  never  again.'  He  restrained  the
thoughts of his sword and the rope that sprang to his mind, and went and sat
down by his master.
When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker than when
they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least from  his own feeling
of  vigour and hunger, he suddenly understood that he had slept the daylight
away,  nine hours at least. Frodo was still fast asleep, lying now stretched
on  his  side. Gollum  was  not to be seen. Various  reproachful  names  for
himself  came  to  Sam's  mind,  drawn  from  the  Gaffer's  large  paternal
word-hoard; then  it  also occurred to him that his  master had been  right:
there  had  for the present been nothing  to guard against. They were at any
rate both alive and unthrottled.
'Poor wretch! ' he said half remorsefully. 'Now I wonder where he's got
to? '
'Not far, not far! ' said a  voice  above him. He looked up and saw the
shape of Gollum's large head and ears against the evening sky.
'Here, what are  you doing? ' cried Sam, his suspicions coming back  as
soon as he saw that shape.
`Smjagol is hungry,' said Gollum. `Be back soon.'
'Come back now!' shouted Sam. 'Hi! Come back!' But Gollum had vanished.
Frodo  woke  at  the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes.
'Hullo!' he said. 'Anything wrong? What's the time?'
'I dunno,' said Sam. 'After sundown, I  reckon. And he's gone off. Says
he's hungry.'
`Don't worry!'  said Frodo. `There's  no help  for it. But  he'll  come
back, you'll see. The promise will hold  yet a while. And he won't leave his
Precious, anyway.'
Frodo made  light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for
hours with Gollum, and a very  hungry Gollum too, loose beside  them. `Don't
think of any of your  Gaffer's hard names,' he said. 'You were worn out, and
it has  turned out well: we are now  both rested. And  we  have a hard  road
ahead, the worst road of all.'
`About the  food,' said Sam. 'How long's it going to take us to do this
job? And  when it's done, what are we  going to do then? This waybread keeps
you on  your legs in a wonderful way, though  it doesn't satisfy the innards
proper, as you might say: not to my feeling anyhow, meaning no disrespect to
them  as made it.  But you have  to eat some of it every day, and it doesn't
grow. I  reckon we've got  enough to last, say,  three weeks or so, and that
with a tight belt and a light tooth, mind you. We've been a bit free with it
so far.'
`I  don't know how long we shall take to -- to finish,' said Frodo. `We
were miserably delayed  in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee,  my dear hobbit --
indeed, Sam my dearest  hobbit, friend of friends --  I do not think we need
give thought  to what comes after that. To             do the job    as you put it -- what
hope is  there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of
that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are
we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If  we can nurse  our limbs
to bring  us to Mount Doom, that is  all we can do. More than I can, I begin
to feel.'
Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did
not kiss it,  though his  tears fell on it. Then  he turned away,  drew  his
sleeve  over his nose, and got up, and stamped about, trying to whistle, and
saying between the efforts: 'Where's that dratted creature?'
