'Here, what are  you doing? ' cried Sam, his suspicions coming back  as
soon as he saw that shape.
`Smjagol is hungry,' said Gollum. `Be back soon.'
'Come back now!' shouted Sam. 'Hi! Come back!' But Gollum had vanished.
Frodo  woke  at  the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes.
'Hullo!' he said. 'Anything wrong? What's the time?'
'I dunno,' said Sam. 'After sundown, I  reckon. And he's gone off. Says
he's hungry.'
`Don't worry!'  said Frodo. `There's  no help  for it. But  he'll  come
back, you'll see. The promise will hold  yet a while. And he won't leave his
Precious, anyway.'
Frodo made  light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for
hours with Gollum, and a very  hungry Gollum too, loose beside  them. `Don't
think of any of your  Gaffer's hard names,' he said. 'You were worn out, and
it has  turned out well: we are now  both rested. And  we  have a hard  road
ahead, the worst road of all.'
`About the  food,' said Sam. 'How long's it going to take us to do this
job? And  when it's done, what are we  going to do then? This waybread keeps
you on  your legs in a wonderful way, though  it doesn't satisfy the innards
proper, as you might say: not to my feeling anyhow, meaning no disrespect to
them  as made it.  But you have  to eat some of it every day, and it doesn't
grow. I  reckon we've got  enough to last, say,  three weeks or so, and that
with a tight belt and a light tooth, mind you. We've been a bit free with it
so far.'
`I  don't know how long we shall take to -- to finish,' said Frodo. `We
were miserably delayed  in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee,  my dear hobbit --
indeed, Sam my dearest  hobbit, friend of friends --  I do not think we need
give thought  to what comes after that. To             do the job    as you put it -- what
hope is  there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of
that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are
we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If  we can nurse  our limbs
to bring  us to Mount Doom, that is  all we can do. More than I can, I begin
to feel.'
Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did
not kiss it,  though his  tears fell on it. Then  he turned away,  drew  his
sleeve  over his nose, and got up, and stamped about, trying to whistle, and
saying between the efforts: 'Where's that dratted creature?'
It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so quietly
that they did not hear him till  he stood before them. His  fingers and face
were soiled with black mud. He was still chewing  and slavering. What he was
chewing, they did not ask or like to think.
'Worms  or beetles or something slimy out of holes,' thought Sam. 'Brr!
The nasty creature; the poor wretch! '
Gollum  said  nothing to  them,  until he had  drunk deeply  and washed
himself in the  stream. Then he  came up to them, licking  his lips. 'Better
now,' he said. `Are we  rested? Ready to  go  on? Nice  hobbits,  they sleep
beautifully. Trust Smjagol now? Very, very good.'
The next stage of their journey was much the same as the  last. As they
went  on the gully became ever shallower and  the slope  of its  floor  more
gradual. Its  bottom  was less stony and  more earthy, and slowly its  sides
dwindled to mere banks. It began  to wind and wander. That night drew to its
end, but clouds were now over moon and star, and they  knew of the coming of
day only by the slow spreading of the thin grey light.
In  a chill hour they came  to the end of  the water-course. The  banks
became moss-grown mounds. Over the  last shelf of rotting  stone the  stream
gurgled  and fell  down into a brown bog and was lost. Dry  reeds hissed and
rattled though they could feel no wind.
On either  side and in front wide  fens and  mires now lay,  stretching
away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists curled and smoked
from dark and noisome pools. The reek of  them hung  stifling  in the  still
air.  Far away, now almost  due  south, the mountain-walls of Mordor loomed,
like a black bar of rugged clouds floating above a dangerous fog-bound sea.
The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of  Gollum. They did now know,
and  could not guess in that misty light. that they  were in  fact only just
within the northern  borders of the marshes. the  main expanse of  which lay
south of them. They could, if they had known the lands, with some delay have
retraced their steps  a little, and then turning east have come  round  over
hard roads  to the bare plain of Dagorlad: the field of  the  ancient battle
before  the gates of Mordor. Not that there was great hope in such a course.
On that stony  plain  there was no cover,  and across it ran the highways of
the Orcs and the soldiers of the Enemy. Not even the cloaks of  Lurien would
have concealed them there.
'How do we shape our course now, Smjagol? ' asked Frodo. 'Must we cross
these evil-smelling fens? '
`No need,  no  need at all,' said Gollum. 'Not if hobbits want to reach
the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick.  Back a little, and round a
little' -- his skinny arm waved north and  east -- `and you can come on hard
cold roads to the  very gates of  His country.  Lots  of  His people will be
there looking out for guests, very pleased to  take them straight  to Him, O
yes. His Eye watches  that way all the  time. It caught  Smjagol there, long
ago.' Gollum shuddered. 'But Smjagol has used his eyes since then, yes, yes:
I've used  eyes  and feet  and  nose since then. l  know  other  ways.  More
difficult, not so quick; but  better, if  we  don't want  Him to see. Follow
Smjagol! He can take you through  the marshes, through the mists. nice thick
mists. Follow  Smjagol very carefully, and you  may go  a long  way. quite a
long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps.'
It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the  marsh-reeks
lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low  clouded  sky, and Gollum  seemed
anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a brief  rest they set out
again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent world, cut off from all view of
the lands about, either the hills  that they  had left or the mountains that
they sought. They went slowly in single file: Gollum, Sam, Frodo.
Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went. he
often lagged. The hobbits soon  found that what had looked like one vast fen
was  really  an  endless  network  of  pools,  and soft  mires. and  winding
half-strangled water-courses.  Among  these  a cunning eye  and  foot  could
thread  a wandering path. Gollum  certainly had that cunning, and needed all
of it. His head on its long  neck  was ever turning this way and that, while
he sniffed and muttered all the time to himself. Sometimes he would  hold up
his  hand and halt  them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing
the ground with fingers or toes. or merely listening with one ear pressed to
the earth.
It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this
forsaken country. The only green was the scum  of  livid weed  on  the  dark
greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses  and rotting reeds loomed
up in the mists like ragged shadows of long-forgotten summers.
As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists  lifted,
growing thinner and more  transparent. Far above  the rot and vapours of the
world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors
of dazzling  foam, but  only a  passing  ghost of her could they  see below,
bleared,  pale, giving  no  colour  and  no  warmth. But even at this  faint
