`No need,  no  need at all,' said Gollum. 'Not if hobbits want to reach
the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick.  Back a little, and round a
little' -- his skinny arm waved north and  east -- `and you can come on hard
cold roads to the  very gates of  His country.  Lots  of  His people will be
there looking out for guests, very pleased to  take them straight  to Him, O
yes. His Eye watches  that way all the  time. It caught  Smjagol there, long
ago.' Gollum shuddered. 'But Smjagol has used his eyes since then, yes, yes:
I've used  eyes  and feet  and  nose since then. l  know  other  ways.  More
difficult, not so quick; but  better, if  we  don't want  Him to see. Follow
Smjagol! He can take you through  the marshes, through the mists. nice thick
mists. Follow  Smjagol very carefully, and you  may go  a long  way. quite a
long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps.'
It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the  marsh-reeks
lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low  clouded  sky, and Gollum  seemed
anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a brief  rest they set out
again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent world, cut off from all view of
the lands about, either the hills  that they  had left or the mountains that
they sought. They went slowly in single file: Gollum, Sam, Frodo.
Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went. he
often lagged. The hobbits soon  found that what had looked like one vast fen
was  really  an  endless  network  of  pools,  and soft  mires. and  winding
half-strangled water-courses.  Among  these  a cunning eye  and  foot  could
thread  a wandering path. Gollum  certainly had that cunning, and needed all
of it. His head on its long  neck  was ever turning this way and that, while
he sniffed and muttered all the time to himself. Sometimes he would  hold up
his  hand and halt  them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing
the ground with fingers or toes. or merely listening with one ear pressed to
the earth.
It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this
forsaken country. The only green was the scum  of  livid weed  on  the  dark
greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses  and rotting reeds loomed
up in the mists like ragged shadows of long-forgotten summers.
As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists  lifted,
growing thinner and more  transparent. Far above  the rot and vapours of the
world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors
of dazzling  foam, but  only a  passing  ghost of her could they  see below,
bleared,  pale, giving  no  colour  and  no  warmth. But even at this  faint
reminder of  her  presence  Gollum  scowled and  flinched. He  halted  their
journey,  and they  rested,  squatting  like  little hunted animals, in  the
borders  of  a  great  brown  reed-thicket. There was  a  deep silence, only
scraped on its surfaces by the faint quiver of empty seed-plumes, and broken
grass-blades trembling in small air-movements that they could not feel.
'Not a bird! ' said Sam mournfully.
`No, no birds,' said  Gollum.  `Nice birds! ' He licked his  teeth. 'No
birds  here.  There  are snakeses,  wormses,  things in the  pools. Lots  of
things,  lots  of nasty things. No birds,' he ended sadly. Sam looked at him
with distaste.
So passed  the  third day  of  their  journey with  Gollum.  Before the
shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again, always on
and  on with only brief halts. These  they made not  so much for rest as  to
help Gollum;  for now  even he had to go forward with great care, and he was
sometimes at a loss for a while. They had come to the very midst of the Dead
Marshes, and it was dark.
They  walked   slowly,  stooping,  keeping  close  in  line,  following
attentively  every move that  Gollum made.  The fens grew more  wet, opening
into  wide stagnant meres, among which it grew  more and more  difficult  to
find the firmer places where feet could tread without sinking  into gurgling
mud. The travellers were  light, or maybe none of them would ever have found
a way through.
Presently it  grew  altogether  dark: the air  itself seemed  black and
heavy to breathe. When lights appeared Sam  rubbed his eyes: he  thought his
head was going  queer. He first  saw one with the corner of his  left eye, a
wisp  of pale sheen that faded away;  but  others appeared soon  after: some
like dimly shining smoke,  some  like  misty flames flickering  slowly above
unseen candles; here and there they twisted like ghostly sheets  unfurled by
hidden hands. But neither of his companions spoke a word.
At  last  Sam could bear it  no longer. `What's all this, Gollum? '  he
said in a whisper. `These lights? They're all  round us now. Are we trapped?
Who are they? '
Gollum looked up. A  dark water was before him, and he was crawling  on
the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. 'Yes, they are all round
us,' he whispered. 'The tricksy lights. Candles  of corpses, yes, yes. Don't
you heed them! Don't look! Don't follow them! Where's the master? '
Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He could not see
him. He went some paces back into the darkness,  not daring to move far,  or
to call in more than a  hoarse  whisper. Suddenly he stumbled against Frodo,
who was standing lost in thought, looking at the pale lights. His hands hung
stiff at his sides; water and slime were dripping from them.
`Come,  Mr. Frodo!  ' said Sam.  'Don't look at  them!  Gollum says  we
mustn't. Let's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as
we can -- if we can! '
`All right,' said Frodo,  as if returning out of a dream.  'I'm coming.
Go on! '
Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some old root
or  tussock.  He fell  and came heavily on  his hands, which  sank deep into
sticky ooze,  so that his  face was brought close to the surface of the dark
mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell went up, the  lights flickered
and danced and swirled.  For a moment the water  below him  looked like some
window, glazed with grimy glass, through which he was peering. Wrenching
his
hands out  of the  bog, he sprang  back  with a cry. 'There are dead things,
dead faces in the water,' he said with horror. 'Dead faces! '
Gollum laughed. 'The Dead Marshes,  yes, yes: that is their names,'  he
cackled. `You should not look in when the candles are lit.'
`Who are they? What are they? ' asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo,
who was now behind him.
'I don't know,' said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. 'But I have seen  them
too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the pools, pale
faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw  them: grim faces and evil, and
noble faces and sad. Many faces  proud and fair, and weeds  in their  silver
hair.  But all foul, all rotting, all  dead. A fell light is in them.' Frodo
hid  his eyes in his hands.  'I  know not who they are; but I thought I  saw
there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.'
`Yes, yes,' said Gollum. `All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Orcs.
The  Dead  Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, yes, so they told him
when Smjagol was young, when I was young  before the Precious came. It was
a
great  battle. Tall  Men with long swords, and terrible  Elves,  and  Orcses
shrieking. They fought on  the plain for days and months at the Black Gates.
But  the  Marshes have grown since  then,  swallowed up the  graves;  always
creeping, creeping.'
