him. He went some paces back into the darkness,  not daring to move far,  or
to call in more than a  hoarse  whisper. Suddenly he stumbled against Frodo,
who was standing lost in thought, looking at the pale lights. His hands hung
stiff at his sides; water and slime were dripping from them.
`Come,  Mr. Frodo!  ' said Sam.  'Don't look at  them!  Gollum says  we
mustn't. Let's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as
we can -- if we can! '
`All right,' said Frodo,  as if returning out of a dream.  'I'm coming.
Go on! '
Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some old root
or  tussock.  He fell  and came heavily on  his hands, which  sank deep into
sticky ooze,  so that his  face was brought close to the surface of the dark
mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell went up, the  lights flickered
and danced and swirled.  For a moment the water  below him  looked like some
window, glazed with grimy glass, through which he was peering. Wrenching
his
hands out  of the  bog, he sprang  back  with a cry. 'There are dead things,
dead faces in the water,' he said with horror. 'Dead faces! '
Gollum laughed. 'The Dead Marshes,  yes, yes: that is their names,'  he
cackled. `You should not look in when the candles are lit.'
`Who are they? What are they? ' asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo,
who was now behind him.
'I don't know,' said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. 'But I have seen  them
too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the pools, pale
faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw  them: grim faces and evil, and
noble faces and sad. Many faces  proud and fair, and weeds  in their  silver
hair.  But all foul, all rotting, all  dead. A fell light is in them.' Frodo
hid  his eyes in his hands.  'I  know not who they are; but I thought I  saw
there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.'
`Yes, yes,' said Gollum. `All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Orcs.
The  Dead  Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, yes, so they told him
when Smjagol was young, when I was young  before the Precious came. It was
a
great  battle. Tall  Men with long swords, and terrible  Elves,  and  Orcses
shrieking. They fought on  the plain for days and months at the Black Gates.
But  the  Marshes have grown since  then,  swallowed up the  graves;  always
creeping, creeping.'
'But that is an age and more ago,'  said Sam. 'The Dead can't be really
there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? '
`Who knows? Smjagol doesn't  know,'  answered Gollum. 'You cannot reach
them,  you  cannot touch them. We tried once, .yes,  precious. I tried once;
but you cannot reach them. Only  shapes  to see, perhaps, not  to  touch. No
precious! All dead.'
Sam  looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he guessed
why Smjagol  had tried to touch them. `Well, I don't  want to  see them,' he
said. 'Never again! Can't we get on and get away? '
`Yes,  yes,' said  Gollum. `But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Or
hobbits go  down to  join the Dead  ones  and light  little  candles. Follow
Smjagol! Don't look at lights! '
He  crawled away to the  right, seeking for a path round the mere. They
came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as he  did. 'Three
precious  little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this goes on much longer,'
thought Sam.
At last they came to the  end of the black  mere, and  they crossed it,
perilously,  crawling  or hopping  from  one  treacherous island tussock  to
another. Often they floundered, stepping or  falling hands-first into waters
as  noisome as a cesspool,  till  they were slimed and  fouled almost  up to
their necks and stank in one another's nostrils.
It was late  in the night  when at  length  they reached  firmer ground
again.  Gollum hissed  and whispered to himself, but it appeared that he was
pleased: in some mysterious way,  by some blended  sense of feel, and smell,
and uncanny memory for shapes  in  the dark, he seemed to know just where he
was again, and to be sure of his road ahead.
`Now on we  go!  ' he  said.  'Nice  hobbits! Brave  hobbits! Very very
weary, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us. But we must take master
away from the wicked lights, yes, yes, we must.' With these words he started
off again, almost  at a trot,  down what  appeared to be a long lane between
high reeds, and they  stumbled after him  as quickly as they could. But in a
little while he stopped suddenly and sniffed the  air doubtfully, hissing as
if he was troubled or displeased again.
'What is it? ' growled Sam, misinterpreting the signs. `What's the need
to  sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. You stink, and
master stinks; the whole place stinks.'
'Yes, yes, and Sam stinks! ' answered Gollum. `Poor Smjagol  smells it,
but good  Smjagol bears  it. Helps nice master. But  that's no  matter.  The
air's moving, change is coming. Smjagol wonders; he's not happy.'
He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and  every  now and again he
stood  up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and  southward.  For
some  time the hobbits could not  hear  or feel what was troubling him. Then
suddenly all  three  halted, stiffening and listening. To Frodo  and  Sam it
seemed that  they  heard, far away, a  long  wailing cry, high and  thin and
cruel.  They shivered. At  the same  moment the stirring  of the  air became
perceptible to them; and it grew  very cold. As they  stood  straining their
ears,  they heard a noise  like a  wind coming  in  the distance.  The misty
lights wavered, dimmed, and went out.
Gollum would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until
with a rush the wind came upon  them, hissing and snarling over the marshes.
The  night became less  dark,  light enough  for them to  see, or  half see,
shapeless drifts of fog,  curling and  twisting  as it rolled over them  and
passed them. Looking up they saw the clouds breaking and shredding; and then
high in the south the moon glimmered out, riding in the flying wrack.
For a moment the sight of  it  gladdened the hearts of the hobbits; but
Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face. Then Frodo and
Sam
staring at  the sky, breathing deeply of the  fresher  air, saw  it come:  a
small  cloud  flying from the  accursed hills; a  black  shadow loosed  from
Mordor;  a vast shape winged and ominous. It  scudded  across the  moon, and
with a deadly cry went away westward, outrunning the wind in its fell speed.
They fell  forward, grovelling  heedlessly on the cold earth.  But  the
shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing  lower now, right above them,
sweeping the  fen-reek with its ghastly wings. And then  it was gone, flying
back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of Sauron; and behind it the wind
roared away, leaving the  Dead Marshes bare and bleak. The naked  waste,  as
far  as the eye could pierce, even to the  distant  menace of the mountains,
was dappled with the fitful moonlight.
Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children wakened from an
evil dream to find the familiar  night still over the world. But Gollum  lay
on the ground as if  he had been stunned. They  roused him  with difficulty,
and for some time  he  would not  lift  his  face, but knelt forward on  his
elbows, covering the back of his head with his large flat hands.
`Wraiths!'  he wailed. `Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their master.
