but good  Smjagol bears  it. Helps nice master. But  that's no  matter.  The
air's moving, change is coming. Smjagol wonders; he's not happy.'
He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and  every  now and again he
stood  up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and  southward.  For
some  time the hobbits could not  hear  or feel what was troubling him. Then
suddenly all  three  halted, stiffening and listening. To Frodo  and  Sam it
seemed that  they  heard, far away, a  long  wailing cry, high and  thin and
cruel.  They shivered. At  the same  moment the stirring  of the  air became
perceptible to them; and it grew  very cold. As they  stood  straining their
ears,  they heard a noise  like a  wind coming  in  the distance.  The misty
lights wavered, dimmed, and went out.
Gollum would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until
with a rush the wind came upon  them, hissing and snarling over the marshes.
The  night became less  dark,  light enough  for them to  see, or  half see,
shapeless drifts of fog,  curling and  twisting  as it rolled over them  and
passed them. Looking up they saw the clouds breaking and shredding; and then
high in the south the moon glimmered out, riding in the flying wrack.
For a moment the sight of  it  gladdened the hearts of the hobbits; but
Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face. Then Frodo and
Sam
staring at  the sky, breathing deeply of the  fresher  air, saw  it come:  a
small  cloud  flying from the  accursed hills; a  black  shadow loosed  from
Mordor;  a vast shape winged and ominous. It  scudded  across the  moon, and
with a deadly cry went away westward, outrunning the wind in its fell speed.
They fell  forward, grovelling  heedlessly on the cold earth.  But  the
shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing  lower now, right above them,
sweeping the  fen-reek with its ghastly wings. And then  it was gone, flying
back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of Sauron; and behind it the wind
roared away, leaving the  Dead Marshes bare and bleak. The naked  waste,  as
far  as the eye could pierce, even to the  distant  menace of the mountains,
was dappled with the fitful moonlight.
Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children wakened from an
evil dream to find the familiar  night still over the world. But Gollum  lay
on the ground as if  he had been stunned. They  roused him  with difficulty,
and for some time  he  would not  lift  his  face, but knelt forward on  his
elbows, covering the back of his head with his large flat hands.
`Wraiths!'  he wailed. `Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their master.
They see everything, everything. Nothing can hide from them. Curse the White
,
Face! And they tell  Him everything. He sees, He knows. Ach,                     gollum gollum      ,
gollum   !  '  It was not until  the moon had  sunk, westering  far  beyond Tol
Brandir, that he would get up or make a move.
From that time on Sam thought that he  sensed a change in Gollum again.
He was more  fawning and would-be  friendly; but Sam  surprised some strange
looks  in his eyes at times, especially towards Frodo; and he went back more
and  more  into his  old  manner  of  speaking. And Sam  had another growing
anxiety. Frodo seemed to be weary, weary to the point of exhaustion. He said
nothing.  indeed he  hardly  spoke  at all; and  he did not complain, but he
walked like one who carries a load, the  weight of which is ever increasing;
and he dragged along, slower and slower, so that Sam had often to beg Gollum
to wait and not to leave their master behind.
In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the Ring
on  its chain about his neck grow  more burdensome.  He was now beginning to
feel  it as an actual  weight  dragging him earthwards.  But far more he was
troubled by the Eye: so he called it to  himself. It was that more  than the
drag of the Ring that made him cower  and stoop as he walked. The Eye:  that
horrible  growing sense of a  hostile will  that  strove with great power to
pierce all shadows of  cloud, and earth, and  flesh, and to see you: to  pin
you under its deadly gaze, naked, immovable. So thin, so frail and thin, the
veils  were become  that still warded  it  off. Frodo  knew just  where  the
present habitation and heart of that will now was: as certainly as a man can
tell the  direction of the sun with his eyes shut. He was facing it, and its
potency beat upon his brow.
Gollum probably felt something of the same sort.  But  what went  on in
his wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye, and the lust of the Ring
that was so near, and his grovelling  promise made half in the fear of  cold
iron, the hobbits did not guess: Frodo gave no thought to it. Sam's mind was
occupied  mostly  with his  master hardly  noticing the  dark cloud that had
fallen on his own  heart. He put Frodo  in front  of  him  now, and  kept  a
watchful eye on every movement of  his,  supporting him if  he stumbled, and
trying to encourage him with clumsy words.
When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much closer
the ominous mountains had already drawn. The air was now clearer and colder,
and though still far off, the walls of Mordor were no longer a cloudy menace
on the edge of sight, but as  grim black towers they frowned across a dismal
waste. The marshes were at an end, dying away into dead peats and wide flats
of  dry cracked mud. The land ahead rose in long shallow  slopes, barren and
pitiless, towards the desert that lay at Sauron's gate.
While the  grey light lasted,  they cowered under a  black  stone  like
worms,  shrinking, lest the winged terror should pass  and spy them with its
cruel eyes. The  remainder of that journey  was a shadow of growing  fear in
which  memory could  find  nothing  to  rest upon.  For two more nights they
struggled on through the weary pathless land. The air, as it seemed to them,
grew harsh, and filled  with  a  bitter  reek that caught their  breath  and
parched their mouths.
At last,  on the  fifth morning since  they took the road  with Gollum,
they halted once  more. Before  them  dark in  the dawn the great  mountains
reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud. Out from  their feet were flung huge
buttresses  and  broken hills  that were now at the nearest  scarce a  dozen
miles away. Frodo looked round  in horror. Dreadful as the Dead  Marshes had
been, and  the  arid moors  of the  Noman-lands, more loathsome  far was the
country that the  crawling day now  slowly  unveiled  to his shrinking eyes.
Even to the  Mere  of Dead Faces some haggard phantom of  green spring
would
come; but here neither spring nor summer would ever come again. Here
nothing
lived,  not  even the  leprous growths that feed on rottenness. The  gasping
pools were choked  with ash and crawling muds, sickly white and grey, as  if
the mountains had vomited the filth of  their entrails upon the lands about.
High  mounds of crushed and powdered rock, great cones of earth fire-blasted
and  poison-stained, stood like an obscene graveyard in endless rows, slowly
revealed in the reluctant light.
They  had come to  the desolation that lay  before Mordor:  the lasting
monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should  endure when all their
purposes were  made  void; a  land defiled,  diseased beyond  all healing --
unless the Great  Sea should enter in and  wash  it with oblivion.  `I  feel
sick,' said Sam. Frodo did not speak.
For a while  they stood there, like men on the edge  of a  sleep  where
nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only come to
morning  through the  shadows. The light broadened and hardened. The
gasping
pits and  poisonous mounds grew hideously clear.  The  sun  was up,  walking
