waste. The marshes were at an end, dying away into dead peats and wide flats
of  dry cracked mud. The land ahead rose in long shallow  slopes, barren and
pitiless, towards the desert that lay at Sauron's gate.
While the  grey light lasted,  they cowered under a  black  stone  like
worms,  shrinking, lest the winged terror should pass  and spy them with its
cruel eyes. The  remainder of that journey  was a shadow of growing  fear in
which  memory could  find  nothing  to  rest upon.  For two more nights they
struggled on through the weary pathless land. The air, as it seemed to them,
grew harsh, and filled  with  a  bitter  reek that caught their  breath  and
parched their mouths.
At last,  on the  fifth morning since  they took the road  with Gollum,
they halted once  more. Before  them  dark in  the dawn the great  mountains
reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud. Out from  their feet were flung huge
buttresses  and  broken hills  that were now at the nearest  scarce a  dozen
miles away. Frodo looked round  in horror. Dreadful as the Dead  Marshes had
been, and  the  arid moors  of the  Noman-lands, more loathsome  far was the
country that the  crawling day now  slowly  unveiled  to his shrinking eyes.
Even to the  Mere  of Dead Faces some haggard phantom of  green spring
would
come; but here neither spring nor summer would ever come again. Here
nothing
lived,  not  even the  leprous growths that feed on rottenness. The  gasping
pools were choked  with ash and crawling muds, sickly white and grey, as  if
the mountains had vomited the filth of  their entrails upon the lands about.
High  mounds of crushed and powdered rock, great cones of earth fire-blasted
and  poison-stained, stood like an obscene graveyard in endless rows, slowly
revealed in the reluctant light.
They  had come to  the desolation that lay  before Mordor:  the lasting
monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should  endure when all their
purposes were  made  void; a  land defiled,  diseased beyond  all healing --
unless the Great  Sea should enter in and  wash  it with oblivion.  `I  feel
sick,' said Sam. Frodo did not speak.
For a while  they stood there, like men on the edge  of a  sleep  where
nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only come to
morning  through the  shadows. The light broadened and hardened. The
gasping
pits and  poisonous mounds grew hideously clear.  The  sun  was up,  walking
among clouds and long flags of smoke, but even the sunlight was defiled. The
hobbits had no welcome for that light; unfriendly  it seemed, revealing them
in their helplessness  --  little squeaking ghosts that  wandered among  the
ash-heaps of the Dark Lord.
Too weary  to go  further  they sought for some place where they  could
rest. For a while  they sat without speaking  under the shadow of a mound of
slag; but foul fumes  leaked out of it, catching their  throats and  choking
them. Gollum was the first to get up. Spluttering  and  cursing he rose, and
without  a  word or  a glance at the hobbits  he crawled  away on all fours.
Frodo and Sam crawled  after him, until  they came to a wide almost circular
pit, high-banked upon the west. It was  cold and dead, and  a foul  sump  of
oily many-coloured ooze lay at its bottom.  In  this evil hole they cowered,
hoping in its shadow to escape the attention of the Eye.
The  day passed  slowly. A  great thirst troubled  them, but they drank
only a few  drops from their bottles-last filled in  the gully, which now as
they looked back in thought seemed to  them a place of peace and beauty. The
hobbits  took it in turn to watch. At first, tired as they  were, neither of
them could sleep at all; but as the sun far away was climbing down into slow
moving cloud, Sam dozed. It was Frodo's turn to bc on  guard. He lay back on
the slope of the pit, but that did not ease the sense  of burden that was on
him. He looked  up at the  smoke-streaked sky and saw strange phantoms, dark
riding shapes, and  faces  out of the past. He  lost count of time, hovering
between sleep and waking, until forgetfulness came over him.
Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling.  It was
evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asleep, and had slid
down nearly to the  bottom of  the pit. Gollum was by  him. For a moment Sam
thought that he was trying to  rouse Frodo; then he saw that it was  not so.
Gollum was talking to himself. Smjagol was holding a  debate with some other
thought  that used the same voice but  made it squeak and hiss. A pale light
and a green light alternated in his eyes as he spoke.
`Smjagol promised,' said the first thought.
`Yes,  yes, my precious,' came  the  answer, 'we promised: to  save our
Precious, not to let Him have it -- never. But it's going to Him yes, nearer
every step.  What's the hobbit going  to  do  with it,  we wonders,  yes  we
wonders.'
`I don't know. I can't help it. Master's  got it. Smjagol  promised  to
help the master.'
`Yes,  yes, to  help the master: the  master of the Precious. But if we
was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep promises.'
`But Smjagol said  he  would be very  very good.  Nice  hobbit! He took
cruel rope off Smjagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.'
'Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be  good,  good as fish,  sweet
one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no, no.'
`But the Precious holds the promise,' the voice of Smjagol objected.
`Then take it,' said  the other,  `and let's hold it ourselfs!  Then we
shall be master,     gollum   ! Make the other hobbit, the nasty suspicious hobbit,
make him crawl, yes,        gollum   !'
`But not the nice hobbit? '
`Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious,
yes,  a  Baggins.  A  Baggins  stole it. He  found it  and  he said nothing,
nothing. We hates Bagginses.'
'No, not this Baggins.'
'Yes, every Baggins. All peoples  that  keep the Precious. We must have
it! '
`But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us! '
'He sees.  He knows.  He  heard us make silly  promises  -- against His
orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take it.'
'Not for Him! '
'No, sweet  one. See, my precious: if  we  has it, then we  can escape,
even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than Wraiths. Lord
Smjagol? Gollum  the Great?            The   Gollum! Eat fish every day,  three times  a
day; fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we
wants it, we wants it! '
'But there's two of them. They'll wake too quick and kill  us,'  whined
Smjagol in a last effort. `Not now. Not yet.'
'We  wants  it! But' -- and here there  was a  long  pause, as if a new
thought had wakened.  `Not yet,  eh? Perhaps not. She might help. She might,
yes.'
`No, no! Not that way! ' wailed Smjagol.
`Yes! We wants it! We wants it! '
Each time that  the second thought spoke, Gollum's  long hand crept out
slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a jerk as
Smjagol
spoke  again. Finally  both  arms,  with long fingers  flexed and twitching,
