`Yes,  yes, to  help the master: the  master of the Precious. But if we
was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep promises.'
`But Smjagol said  he  would be very  very good.  Nice  hobbit! He took
cruel rope off Smjagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.'
'Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be  good,  good as fish,  sweet
one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no, no.'
`But the Precious holds the promise,' the voice of Smjagol objected.
`Then take it,' said  the other,  `and let's hold it ourselfs!  Then we
shall be master,     gollum   ! Make the other hobbit, the nasty suspicious hobbit,
make him crawl, yes,        gollum   !'
`But not the nice hobbit? '
`Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious,
yes,  a  Baggins.  A  Baggins  stole it. He  found it  and  he said nothing,
nothing. We hates Bagginses.'
'No, not this Baggins.'
'Yes, every Baggins. All peoples  that  keep the Precious. We must have
it! '
`But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us! '
'He sees.  He knows.  He  heard us make silly  promises  -- against His
orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take it.'
'Not for Him! '
'No, sweet  one. See, my precious: if  we  has it, then we  can escape,
even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than Wraiths. Lord
Smjagol? Gollum  the Great?            The   Gollum! Eat fish every day,  three times  a
day; fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we
wants it, we wants it! '
'But there's two of them. They'll wake too quick and kill  us,'  whined
Smjagol in a last effort. `Not now. Not yet.'
'We  wants  it! But' -- and here there  was a  long  pause, as if a new
thought had wakened.  `Not yet,  eh? Perhaps not. She might help. She might,
yes.'
`No, no! Not that way! ' wailed Smjagol.
`Yes! We wants it! We wants it! '
Each time that  the second thought spoke, Gollum's  long hand crept out
slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a jerk as
Smjagol
spoke  again. Finally  both  arms,  with long fingers  flexed and twitching,
clawed towards his neck.
Sam had lain  still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every move
that Gollum made  from under  his half-closed eye-lids.  To  his simple mind
ordinary  hunger, the desire to eat hobbits, had seemed the chief  danger in
Gollum. He realized  now that it was not so: Gollum was feeling the terrible
call  of the Ring. The Dark Lord was            He  , of course; but Sam wondered who
She
was. One of  the nasty friends the little wretch had made in his wanderings,
he supposed.  Then he  forgot the  point, for things had  plainly  gone  far
enough, and were getting dangerous. A great heaviness  was in all his limbs,
but he roused  himself with an effort and sat up. Something warned him to be
careful  and  not to reveal that he had overheard  the debate. He let  out a
loud sigh and gave a huge yawn.
`What's the time? ' he said sleepily.
Gollum sent  out a  long  hiss  through his  teeth. He stood  up  for a
moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forward on to all
fours and  crawling  up the bank  of the pit. 'Nice hobbits! Nice Sam! '  he
said. 'Sleepy heads,  yes, sleepy  heads! Leave good  Smjagol to watch!  But
it's evening. Dusk is creeping. Time to go.'
`High time!  ' thought Sam. 'And time we parted,  too.' Yet it  crossed
his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous turned loose as
kept with them. 'Curse him! I wish he was choked!' he muttered.  He stumbled
down the bank and roused his master.
Strangely enough, Frodo felt  refreshed. He had been dreaming. The dark
shadow  had  passed,  and  a  fair  vision  had visited him in  this land of
disease. Nothing remained  of it in his  memory, yet  because of it he  felt
glad and lighter of heart. His burden was less heavy on him. Gollum welcomed
him  with  dog-like delight. He  chuckled and  chattered,  cracking his long
fingers, and pawing at Frodo's knees. Frodo smiled at him.
'Come! ' he said. `You  have guided us well and faithfully. This is the
last stage. Bring us to the Gate, and then I will not ask you to go further.
Bring us to  the Gate,  and you  may  go where you wish  --  only not to our
enemies.'
'To  the Gate, eh?' Gollum squeaked, seeming surprised  and frightened.
'To the Gate, master  says! Yes, he says so.  And  good Smjagol does what he
asks, O yes. But when we gets closer, we'll  see perhaps we'll  see then. It
won't look nice at all. O no! O no!'
'Go on with you! ' said Sam. `Let's get it over! '
In the falling dusk they  scrambled out of the pit and slowly  threaded
their way through the dead land. They had not gone far before they felt once
more the fear that had fallen on them  when  the winged shape swept over the
marshes.  They  halted, cowering  on the evil-smelling ground; but  they saw
nothing  in the gloomy evening sky above, and soon the  menace  passed, high
overhead, going maybe  on some swift errand  from Barad-dyr.  After  a while
Gollum got up and crept forward again, muttering and shaking.
About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it
now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the clouds,  rushing
with terrible  speed  into  the  West.  Gollum,  however,  was helpless with
terror, and was convinced that they were  being hunted, that  their approach
was known.
`Three times! ' he  whimpered.  'Three times is  a threat. They feel us
here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We cannot go any
further this way, no. It's no use, no use! '
Pleading and  kind words were no longer of any  avail. It was not until
Frodo commanded him angrily and  laid a hand on  his sword-hilt  that Gollum
would get up again. Then at last he rose with  a snarl, and went before them
like a beaten dog.
So they stumbled on through  the weary end  of the night, and until the
coming  of another  day of  fear they walked  in silence with  bowed  heads,
seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in their ears.
