O stars that in the Sunless Year
With shining hand by her were sawn,
In windy fields now bright and clear
We see your silver blossom blown!
O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees,
Thy starlight on the Western Seas.
The  song  ended.  'These  are High  Elves!  They  spoke  the  name  of
Elbereth!' said Frodo in amazement,  'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen
in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth,  east  of the  Great Sea.
This is indeed a strange chance!'
The hobbits  sat in shadow  by the wayside. Before long the Elves  came
down the lane towards the valley. They  passed slowly, and the hobbits could
see the starlight glimmering on their hair and  in their  eyes. They bore no
lights,  yet as they walked a  shimmer, like the light of the moon above the
rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were
now silent, and  as the last Elf  passed  he turned  and looked  towards the
hobbits and laughed.
'Hail,  Frodo!' he  cried. 'You  are  abroad  late. Or are  you perhaps
lost?'  Then he called aloud  to the others, and all the company stopped and
gathered round.
'This  is indeed  wonderful!'  they  said. 'Three hobbits in  a wood at
night! We  have not seen  such a thing  since Bilbo went away.  What is  the
meaning of it?'
'The meaning of it, fair people,'  said Frodo, 'is simply that  we seem
to be going the same  way as you are. I like  walking under the stars. But I
would welcome your company.'
'But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are  so  dull,' they
laughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do
not
know whither we are going?'
'And how do you know my name?' asked Frodo in return.
'We know many things,'  they said. 'We have seen you often before  with
Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.'
'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo.
'I am Gildor,' answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailed him.
'Gildor Inglorion of  the  House  of Finrod. We are Exiles, and most of  our
kindred have long  ago  departed and  we  too are  now only  tarrying here a
while, ere we return  over the Great Sea.  But some  of  our kinsfolk  dwell
still  in peace in Rivendell.  Come now, Frodo, tell us what you  are doing?
For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.'
'O Wise  People!' interrupted Pippin eagerly. 'Tell us about  the Black
Riders!'
'Black Riders?' they said  in  low voices. 'Why  do you ask about Black
Riders?'
'Because two Black Riders have  overtaken us today,  or one has done so
twice,' said Pippin;  'only a little while ago  he slipped away as you  drew
near.'
The Elves did not answer at  once, but spoke together  softly  in their
own tongue.  At length Gildor turned to the  hobbits. 'We  will not speak of
this here,' he said. 'We think you had  best come now with us. It is not our
custom, but for this time we will lake you on our road, and  you shall lodge
with us tonight, if you will.'
'O Fair  Folk!  This is good fortune beyond my hope,' said  Pippin. Sam
was speechless.  'I  thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing.
'Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo,           a star shines on the hour of our meeting,' he
added in the high-elven speech.
'Be careful,  friends!' cried  Gildor laughing. 'Speak no secrets! Here
is  a  scholar in  the  Ancient  Tongue.  Bilbo  was a  good  master.  Hail,
Elf-friend!' he said, bowing to Frodo.  'Come now with your friends and join
our company! You had best walk in the middle so  that you may not stray. You
may be weary before we halt.'
'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo.
'For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It is some
miles, but  you shall have  rest at the  end of it, and it will shorten your
journey tomorrow.'
They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint
lights: for  Elves  (even  more  than hobbits)  could walk when they  wished
without sound or footfall.  Pippin soon began  to feel sleepy, and staggered
once  or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side  put out  his  arm  and
saved him from a  fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a  dream,
with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished joy.
The  woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and
thicker;  and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills,
there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At
last the Elves turned aside from the path.  A  green ride  lay almost unseen
through the  thickets on the right; and this they  followed as it wound away
back up the  wooded slopes on to the  top of a shoulder of  the  hills  that
stood out into the lower land of the river-valley. Suddenly they came out of
the shadow of  the trees, and  before them lay a  wide space of  grass, grey
under the night. On three sides the woods  pressed upon it; but eastward the
ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of
the slope,  were  below their feet. Beyond, the  low lands  lay dim and flat
under the stars.  Nearer  at hand  a few lights twinkled  in the village  of
Woodhall.
The  Elves sat on  the grass  and spoke  together in  soft voices; they
seemed to take no further  notice of the hobbits.  Frodo and his  companions
wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness stole  over  them.
The  night grew  on,  and  the  lights in the valley  went out. Pippin  fell
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock.
Away  high  in the East swung Remmirath,  the Netted Stars,  and slowly
above  the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some
shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned  up,
as  he  climbed  over the  rim  of the  world, the  Swordsman  of  the  Sky,
Menelvagor with  his shining  belt. The  Elves all burst into song. Suddenly
under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light.
'Come!' the  Elves called to the hobbits. 'Come!  Now is  the time  for
speech and merriment!'
Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. 'There is a fire in the
hall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him.
At the south  end of the greensward  there  was an opening.  There  the
green  floor  ran on into the wood, and formed a  wide  space like  a  hall,
roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each
side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning  steadily. The Elves sat
round the  fire upon the grass or  upon the  sawn  rings of old trunks. Some
went  to  and  fro bearing cups and  pouring  drink; others brought  food on
heaped plates and dishes.
'This  is poor fare,' they said  to the hobbits; 'for we are lodging in
