'Go on with you! ' said Sam. `Let's get it over! '
In the falling dusk they  scrambled out of the pit and slowly  threaded
their way through the dead land. They had not gone far before they felt once
more the fear that had fallen on them  when  the winged shape swept over the
marshes.  They  halted, cowering  on the evil-smelling ground; but  they saw
nothing  in the gloomy evening sky above, and soon the  menace  passed, high
overhead, going maybe  on some swift errand  from Barad-dyr.  After  a while
Gollum got up and crept forward again, muttering and shaking.
About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it
now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the clouds,  rushing
with terrible  speed  into  the  West.  Gollum,  however,  was helpless with
terror, and was convinced that they were  being hunted, that  their approach
was known.
`Three times! ' he  whimpered.  'Three times is  a threat. They feel us
here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We cannot go any
further this way, no. It's no use, no use! '
Pleading and  kind words were no longer of any  avail. It was not until
Frodo commanded him angrily and  laid a hand on  his sword-hilt  that Gollum
would get up again. Then at last he rose with  a snarl, and went before them
like a beaten dog.
So they stumbled on through  the weary end  of the night, and until the
coming  of another  day of  fear they walked  in silence with  bowed  heads,
seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in their ears.
Chapter 3. The Black Gate is Closed
Before  the  next day dawned  their journey to  Mordor  was  over.  The
marshes and the desert  were  behind them. Before  them, darkling  against a
pallid sky, the great mountains reared their threatening heads.
Upon the west of  Mordor marched the gloomy range  of  Ephel D®ath, the
Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north  the broken peaks and barren  ridges
of  Ered  Lithui, grey as ash. But as these ranges  approached one  another,
being indeed  but  parts  of  one  great  wall about  the mournful plains of
Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of N®rnen amidmost, they
swung out  long arms northward;  and between  these arms  there  was a  deep
defile.  This was Cirith Gorgor,  the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land
of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward  from
its mouth were two  sheer  hills, black-boned and bare. Upon  them stood the
Teeth  of  Mordor, two towers strong and  tall. In days long past they  were
built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power,  after the overthrow of
Sauron and his flight, lest he  should seek to return to his old realm.  But
the strength of Gondor  failed, and men slept, and for long years the towers
stood empty.  Then Sauron returned. Now  the watch-towers, which  had fallen
into  decay,  were  repaired, and  filled  with arms,  and  garrisoned  with
ceaseless vigilance. Stony-faced they were, with  dark  window-holes staring
north and east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes.
Across the  mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff,  the Dark Lord  had
built a rampart of stone. In it  there  was a single gate of  iron, and upon
its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side
the  rock  was bored into  a hundred caves and maggot-holes: there a host of
orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to  war.
None could pass the  Teeth of  Mordor and not feel  their bite, unless  they
were summoned by Sauron, or knew the  secret  passwords  that would open
the
Morannon, the black gate of his land.
The two hobbits  gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from
a distance they could see  in the dim light the movement of the black guards
upon the wall,  and  the patrols before the gate. They lay now peering  over
the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the out-stretched shadow of the northmost
buttress of Ephel D®ath. Winging  the heavy air in a straight flight a crow,
maybe, would have flown but a furlong from  their hiding-place to the  black
summit  of  the  nearer  tower. A faint smoke curled  above it, as  if  fire
smouldered in the hill beneath.
Day  came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless  ridges of Ered
Lithui.  Then suddenly the cry of brazen-throated  trumpets was  heard: from
the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in
the  hills  came  answering calls; and  further  still, remote but  deep and
ominous, there echoed in  the hollow land beyond the mighty horns  and drums
of Barad-dyr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor;  and
the night-guards were  summoned to their dungeons and  deep  halls, and  the
day-guards, evil-eyed and fell,  were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed
dimly on the battlement.
`Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as
if that's about as far as we are ever going  to get. My word, but the Gaffer
would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a
bad  end, if I didn't watch my step, he  did. But  now I don't suppose  I'll
ever see  the  old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of              I told'ee so, Sam    :
more's the  pity. He could go on telling me as  long as he'd got breath,  if
only I could see his old face again. But I'd have to get a wash first, or he
wouldn't know me.
`I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We  can't go no
further-unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.'
`No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't go further. Smjagol  said so.
He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes.  my
precious, we do see. Smjagol  knew  hobbits  could  not  go this way. O yes.
Smjagol knew '
'Then  what the plague  did you  bring  us here  for? '  said  Sam, not
feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable.
`Master said so. Master says:  Bring  us to the  Gate. So  good Smjagol
does so. Master said so, wise master.'
'I did,' said  Frodo. His face  was grim  and set. but resolute. He was
filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness,  but he cowered  no longer, and
his eyes were clear. `I  said so, because  I purpose  to enter Mordor, and I
know no other way. Therefore I shall go this  way. I do not ask anyone to go
with me.'
`No, no,  master! ' wailed  Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great
