buttress of Ephel D®ath. Winging  the heavy air in a straight flight a crow,
maybe, would have flown but a furlong from  their hiding-place to the  black
summit  of  the  nearer  tower. A faint smoke curled  above it, as  if  fire
smouldered in the hill beneath.
Day  came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless  ridges of Ered
Lithui.  Then suddenly the cry of brazen-throated  trumpets was  heard: from
the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in
the  hills  came  answering calls; and  further  still, remote but  deep and
ominous, there echoed in  the hollow land beyond the mighty horns  and drums
of Barad-dyr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor;  and
the night-guards were  summoned to their dungeons and  deep  halls, and  the
day-guards, evil-eyed and fell,  were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed
dimly on the battlement.
`Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as
if that's about as far as we are ever going  to get. My word, but the Gaffer
would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a
bad  end, if I didn't watch my step, he  did. But  now I don't suppose  I'll
ever see  the  old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of              I told'ee so, Sam    :
more's the  pity. He could go on telling me as  long as he'd got breath,  if
only I could see his old face again. But I'd have to get a wash first, or he
wouldn't know me.
`I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We  can't go no
further-unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.'
`No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't go further. Smjagol  said so.
He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes.  my
precious, we do see. Smjagol  knew  hobbits  could  not  go this way. O yes.
Smjagol knew '
'Then  what the plague  did you  bring  us here  for? '  said  Sam, not
feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable.
`Master said so. Master says:  Bring  us to the  Gate. So  good Smjagol
does so. Master said so, wise master.'
'I did,' said  Frodo. His face  was grim  and set. but resolute. He was
filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness,  but he cowered  no longer, and
his eyes were clear. `I  said so, because  I purpose  to enter Mordor, and I
know no other way. Therefore I shall go this  way. I do not ask anyone to go
with me.'
`No, no,  master! ' wailed  Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great
distress.  `No use  that way! No use! Don't take  the Precious to Him! He'll
eat us all,  if He gets it,  eat all the world. Keep it, nice master, and be
kind to Smjagol. Don't let  Him have it. Or go away.  go to nice places, and
give it back to little Smjagol. Yes, yes, master: give  it back, eh? Smjagol
will  keep it  safe;  he will do  lots of good, especially to nice  hobbits.
Hobbits go home. Don't go to the Gate! '
'I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,'
said Frodo. 'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after
must come.'
Sam said nothing.  The look on Frodo's face was enough for him  he knew
that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope  in
the affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful hobbit he had not needed
hope, as  long as  despair could  be  postponed. Now they  were come to  the
bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had
chiefly come  for, and he would  still stick to him. His master would not go
to Mordor alone. Sam would go with him-and at any rate they would get rid of
Gollum.
Gollum, however, did not  intend to  be  got rid  of, yet. He knelt  at
Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and  squeaking. 'Not this way, master! ' he
pleaded, 'There is another way. O  yes indeed there is. Another way. darker,
more difficult to find, more secret. But  Smjagol knows it. Let Smjagol show
you! '
'Another way!  ' said Frodo  doubtfully, looking down  at  Gollum  with
searching eyes.
'Yess! Yess indeed! There         was  another  way. Smjagol found it. Let's  go
and see if it's still there! '
`You have not spoken of this before.'
`No.  Master did not ask.  Master did not say what he  meant  to do. He
does not  tell poor  Smjagol. He says: Smjagol, take me to  the Gate  -- and
then good bye! Smjagol can run away and  be good. But now he says: I purpose
to enter Mordor this way.  So  Smjagol is very  afraid. He does not  want to
lose  nice  master.  And he promised, master made  him promise,  to save the
Precious. But master is going to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand,
if master will go this way. So Smjagol must save them both, and he thinks of
another  way  that there was, once upon a  time.  Nice  master. Smjagol very
good, always helps.'
Sam frowned. If he could have  bored holes in Gollum  with his eyes, he
would have done. His  mind was full of doubt.  To all appearances Gollum was
genuinely  distressed  and anxious to  help Frodo. But  Sam, remembering the
overheard debate, found it hard  to believe that the long submerged  Smjagol
had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the
debate. Sam's  guess was that  the Smjagol and Gollum halves (or what in his
own mind he called Slinker  and Stinker) had made  a  truce and a  temporary
alliance: neither  wanted  the Enemy to get the Ring;  both  wished to  keep
Frodo from capture, and under their  eye, as long as possible -- at any rate
as long as Stinker still had  a  chance  of laying hands  on his 'Precious'.
Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted.
`And it's a good thing neither half  of the old villain don't know what
master means to do,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put
an end  to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I
bet.  Anyhow old Stinker  is so frightened  of the Enemy --  and  he's under
orders  of some kind from him, or was  -- that he'd give us away rather than
be caught helping us; and rather than let his  Precious be melted, maybe. At
least  that's my idea. And I hope  the master will  think it  out carefully.
He's  as wise as any,  but he's soft-hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond
any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.'
Frodo did not answer  Gollum at once.  While these  doubts were passing
through Sam's slow  but  shrewd  mind, he  stood gazing out towards the dark
cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved
in the side of a  low  hill, at some  little height above  a long trenchlike
valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the
midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western  watch-tower.
By morning-light the roads that converged upon the  Gate of Mordor could
now
be clearly  seen,  pale  and  dusty; one  winding  back  northwards; another
dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui;
and  a  third that ran towards him. As  it bent sharply round  the tower, it
entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where  he stood.
Westward, to his  right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains,
and  went off southwards into  the deep shadows that mantled all the western
sides of Ephel D®ath; beyond his sight it journeyed on  into the narrow land
between the mountains and the Great River.
As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement
on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the
