would have done. His  mind was full of doubt.  To all appearances Gollum was
genuinely  distressed  and anxious to  help Frodo. But  Sam, remembering the
overheard debate, found it hard  to believe that the long submerged  Smjagol
had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the
debate. Sam's  guess was that  the Smjagol and Gollum halves (or what in his
own mind he called Slinker  and Stinker) had made  a  truce and a  temporary
alliance: neither  wanted  the Enemy to get the Ring;  both  wished to  keep
Frodo from capture, and under their  eye, as long as possible -- at any rate
as long as Stinker still had  a  chance  of laying hands  on his 'Precious'.
Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted.
`And it's a good thing neither half  of the old villain don't know what
master means to do,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put
an end  to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I
bet.  Anyhow old Stinker  is so frightened  of the Enemy --  and  he's under
orders  of some kind from him, or was  -- that he'd give us away rather than
be caught helping us; and rather than let his  Precious be melted, maybe. At
least  that's my idea. And I hope  the master will  think it  out carefully.
He's  as wise as any,  but he's soft-hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond
any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.'
Frodo did not answer  Gollum at once.  While these  doubts were passing
through Sam's slow  but  shrewd  mind, he  stood gazing out towards the dark
cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved
in the side of a  low  hill, at some  little height above  a long trenchlike
valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the
midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western  watch-tower.
By morning-light the roads that converged upon the  Gate of Mordor could
now
be clearly  seen,  pale  and  dusty; one  winding  back  northwards; another
dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui;
and  a  third that ran towards him. As  it bent sharply round  the tower, it
entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where  he stood.
Westward, to his  right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains,
and  went off southwards into  the deep shadows that mantled all the western
sides of Ephel D®ath; beyond his sight it journeyed on  into the narrow land
between the mountains and the Great River.
As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement
on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the
most part they were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and
wastes beyond. But here and there he caught the gleam of spears and helmets;
and over the levels beside  the roads horsemen could be seen  riding in many
companies.  He  remembered his  vision from afar upon Amon Hen,  so few
days
before, though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope that
had for one wild  moment stirred in his heart was vain. The trumpets had not
rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by
the men of Gondor, risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long
passed away. These were Men  of  other  race, out  of  the  wide  Eastlands,
gathering  to the summons of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before
his  Gate by  night  and  now marched in to swell  his mounting power. As if
suddenly made fully  aware of the  peril  of their  position, alone,  in the
growing light of day, so near  to this  vast menace, Frodo quickly drew  his
frail grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then he
turned to Gollum.
`Smjagol,' he said, `I will trust you once more. lndeed it seems that I
must do so,  and that it is my fate to receive help from you. where  I least
looked  for  it, and  your  fate to help me whom you long  pursued with evil
purpose.  So far  you have deserved well  of me  and have kept your  promise
truly. Truly, I say and mean,' he added with a glance at Sam, 'for twice now
we have been in your  power, and  you have  done no harm to us. Nor have you
tried to take  from  me what you once sought.  May the third time  prove the
best! But I warn you, Smjagol, you are in danger.'
`Yes, yes,  master!  '  said Gollum. `Dreadful  danger! Smjagol's bones
shake to think of it. but he doesn't run away. He must help nice master.'
'I  did not mean  the danger that we all  share,' said Frodo. 'I mean a
danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious.
Remember that! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to
your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me
just  now, foolishly     .  Give it back  to  Smjagol       you  said. Do  not say that
again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will  never get it back. But
the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back.
In  the last need, Smjagol, I should put  on the Precious; and the  Precious
mastered you  long ago. If  I,  wearing  it, were to  command you, you would
obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice  or to cast yourself into the
fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Smjagol!'
Sam looked at his  master with approval, but also with surprise:  there
was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before.
It had  always been a notion  of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was
of  such a high  degree that it  must imply a fair measure of  blindness. Of
course, he  also  firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the
wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and
of Gandalf). Gollum in  his  own  way,  and with  much  more excuse  as  his
acquaintance was  much briefer, may have _made a  similar mistake, confusing
kindness and blindness.  At any rate  this speech abashed and terrified him.
He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but                     nice master    .
Frodo waited patiently for a while,  then he spoke again less  sternly.
`Come now, Gollum  or Smjagol if  you wish, tell  me of this other way,  and
show me,  if you can,  what hope  there is in  it,  enough to justify me  in
turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.'
But  Gollum  was in  a  pitiable state, and  Frodo's  threat  had quite
unnerved  him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his
mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled
on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Smjagol'. After
a  while he grew a  little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if  a
traveller followed the road  that turned west of Ephel D®ath,  he would come
in  time to a  crossing in a circle of  dark trees. On the right a road went
down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went
on southwards.
`On,  on,  on,'  said Gollum. `We  never went that way, but they say it
goes a  hundred leagues, until  you  can  see the Great Water that is  never
still. There are lots of fishes there, and big birds eat fishes: nice birds:
but we never  went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further  still
there are more  lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot  there, and
there are seldom any clouds, and the men are  fierce and have dark faces. We
do not want to see that land.'
`No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third
turning? '
`O yes, O yes, there is a third way,' said Gollum. `That is the road to
the  left.  At  once it begins to climb up,  up, winding  and climbing  back
towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it.
suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.'
`See it, see it? What will you see? '
