Sam looked at his  master with approval, but also with surprise:  there
was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before.
It had  always been a notion  of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was
of  such a high  degree that it  must imply a fair measure of  blindness. Of
course, he  also  firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the
wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and
of Gandalf). Gollum in  his  own  way,  and with  much  more excuse  as  his
acquaintance was  much briefer, may have _made a  similar mistake, confusing
kindness and blindness.  At any rate  this speech abashed and terrified him.
He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but                     nice master    .
Frodo waited patiently for a while,  then he spoke again less  sternly.
`Come now, Gollum  or Smjagol if  you wish, tell  me of this other way,  and
show me,  if you can,  what hope  there is in  it,  enough to justify me  in
turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.'
But  Gollum  was in  a  pitiable state, and  Frodo's  threat  had quite
unnerved  him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his
mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled
on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Smjagol'. After
a  while he grew a  little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if  a
traveller followed the road  that turned west of Ephel D®ath,  he would come
in  time to a  crossing in a circle of  dark trees. On the right a road went
down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went
on southwards.
`On,  on,  on,'  said Gollum. `We  never went that way, but they say it
goes a  hundred leagues, until  you  can  see the Great Water that is  never
still. There are lots of fishes there, and big birds eat fishes: nice birds:
but we never  went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further  still
there are more  lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot  there, and
there are seldom any clouds, and the men are  fierce and have dark faces. We
do not want to see that land.'
`No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third
turning? '
`O yes, O yes, there is a third way,' said Gollum. `That is the road to
the  left.  At  once it begins to climb up,  up, winding  and climbing  back
towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it.
suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.'
`See it, see it? What will you see? '
`The  old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used  to hear tales
from the South, when Smjagol was young, long  ago. O yes. we  used  to  tell
lots of  tales in the evening, sitting by the  banks  of the Great River, in
,
the willow-lands, when the River was younger too,                 gollum gollum       .' He  began
to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited patiently.
`Tales  out  of  the South,' Gollum went on again, `about  the tall Men
with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills  of stone, and the silver
crown of their King and his White Tree:  wonderful  tales.  They  built very
tall towers,  and one they raised was silver-white,  and in it there  was  a
stone like the Moon, and round it were great  white walls. O yes, there were
many tales about the Tower of the Moon.'
`That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built ' said
Frodo. `It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.'
`Yes, He has only four  on the Black Hand,  but they are enough,'  said
Gollum shuddering. 'And He hated Isildur's city.'
'What does he not  hate?  '  said Frodo. 'But what has the Tower of the
Moon to do with us? '
'Well, master, there  it  was and there it is: the  tall tower  and the
white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful.  He conquered it
long ago. It is a very terrible place  now. Travellers shiver  when they see
it, they creep out of sight, they  avoid its shadow. But master will have to
go that way. That is the  only other way, For the mountains are lower there,
and the old road goes up and up, until it reaches  a dark  pass at  the top,
and then it goes down,  down, again --  to Gorgoroth.'  His voice sank  to a
whisper and he shuddered.
`But how will  that help us?  ' asked  Sam. `Surely the Enemy knows all
about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close as this? The
tower isn't empty, is it? '
`O no, not empty!  ' whispered Gollum. `It seems empty, but it isn't, O
no!  Very  dreadful things  live  there.  Orcs. yes always  Orcs; but  worse
things, worse things live  there too. The road climbs right under the shadow
of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves on the  road that they don't
know about. The things inside know: the Silent Watchers.'
`So  that's your advice  is it,' said Sam, 'that  we  should go another
long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one,  when we
get there, if we ever do? '
`No,   no  indeed,'  said  Gollum.  `Hobbits  must  see,  must  try  to
understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round, but it
attends more to some places than to  others. He can't see everything  all at
once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy
Mountains down to  the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one
can  come  to the  Moontower without fighting big battle at the  bridges, or
getting lots of boats which they cannot hide and He will know about.'
'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and  thinking,' said Sam.
`Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? '
'Not  nice  hobbit,  not sensible,'  said Gollum, giving Sam  an  angry
glance  and turning to Frodo. 'Smjagol has talked  to Orcs,  yes  of course,
before he met master, and to many peoples:  he has walked very far. And what
he says now many peoples  are saying.  It's here  in the North that  the big
danger is for Him, and for us. He will come  out of the Black  Gate one day,
one  day soon. That is the only  way big armies can come. But away down west
He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.'
`Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up  and
knock at  their gate  and ask if we're on the right road  for Mordor? Or are
they too silent to answer? It's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and
save ourselves a long tramp.'
'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum.  `It isn't funny, O no! Not
amusing. It's  nut sense to try  and get into  Mordor at all. But  if master
says  I must go     or  I will go , then he  must try some way. But he must not go
to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Smjagol helps. nice
Smjagol. though no one tells him what it is  all about. Smjagol helps again.
He found it. He knows it.'
'What did you find? ' asked Frodo.
Gollum crouched down and his voice  sank to a whisper again. 'A  little
path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes,
very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then' -- his voice sank even
lower  -- `a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last  a little cleft, and  a path
high  above  the  main pass. It was that way  that  Smjagol got  out  of the
darkness. But it was years ago. The path may  have vanished now; but perhaps
not, perhaps not.'
`I  don't  like the sound of it at  all,' said Sam. `Sounds too easy at
any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded  too.
Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught
a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply.
