understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round, but it
attends more to some places than to  others. He can't see everything  all at
once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy
Mountains down to  the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one
can  come  to the  Moontower without fighting big battle at the  bridges, or
getting lots of boats which they cannot hide and He will know about.'
'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and  thinking,' said Sam.
`Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? '
'Not  nice  hobbit,  not sensible,'  said Gollum, giving Sam  an  angry
glance  and turning to Frodo. 'Smjagol has talked  to Orcs,  yes  of course,
before he met master, and to many peoples:  he has walked very far. And what
he says now many peoples  are saying.  It's here  in the North that  the big
danger is for Him, and for us. He will come  out of the Black  Gate one day,
one  day soon. That is the only  way big armies can come. But away down west
He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.'
`Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up  and
knock at  their gate  and ask if we're on the right road  for Mordor? Or are
they too silent to answer? It's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and
save ourselves a long tramp.'
'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum.  `It isn't funny, O no! Not
amusing. It's  nut sense to try  and get into  Mordor at all. But  if master
says  I must go     or  I will go , then he  must try some way. But he must not go
to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Smjagol helps. nice
Smjagol. though no one tells him what it is  all about. Smjagol helps again.
He found it. He knows it.'
'What did you find? ' asked Frodo.
Gollum crouched down and his voice  sank to a whisper again. 'A  little
path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes,
very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then' -- his voice sank even
lower  -- `a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last  a little cleft, and  a path
high  above  the  main pass. It was that way  that  Smjagol got  out  of the
darkness. But it was years ago. The path may  have vanished now; but perhaps
not, perhaps not.'
`I  don't  like the sound of it at  all,' said Sam. `Sounds too easy at
any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded  too.
Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught
a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply.
'Is  it not guarded? ' asked Frodo sternly. `And did you              escape    out  of
the  darkness,  Smjagol? Were you  not rather  permitted  to  depart upon an
errand? That at  least is w hat Aragorn  thought,  who found you by the Dead
Marshes some years ago.'
'It's  a lie! ' hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into  his eyes at
the  naming of Aragorn. `He lied on me, yes he did. I did  escape, all by my
poor  self.  Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I have searched
and searched, of course I have. But not for the  Black One. The Precious was
ours, it was mine I tell you. I did escape.'
Frodo felt a  strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once
not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he had somehow found a
way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it was by his own cunning. For
one thing,  he noted  that Gollum used  I, and that  seemed usually to be  a
sign, on its rare appearances. that some remnants of old truth and sincerity
were  for  the moment on top. But even  if Gollum  could  be trusted on this
point, Frodo did not forget the wiles  of the  Enemy. The 'escape' may  have
been allowed  or arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case
Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back.
'I ask you again,' he said: `is not this secret way guarded? '
But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen  mood. He had  all
the injured air of a liar suspected when for once  he has told the truth. or
part of it. He did not answer.
'Is it not guarded? ' Frodo repeated.
`Yes, yes,  perhaps.  No safe places  in  this  country,'  said  Gollum
sulkily.  'No safe  places. But  master must try it or  go home.  . No other
way.' They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous place and
the high pass he could not tell, or would not.
Its  name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful  rumour.  Aragorn  could
perhaps have told them that name  and its  significance: Gandalf  would have
warned  them. But they  were  alone, and Aragorn was  far away, and  Gandalf
stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman, delayed by treason.
Yet even  as he spoke his last words to Saruman, and the                  palantnr    crashed in
fire upon the steps of Orthanc. his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise,
over the long leagues his mind sought for them in hope and pity.
Maybe Frodo  felt  it,  not knowing it, as he  had upon Amon  Hen, even
though he believed that Gandalf was  gone, gone  for ever into the shadow in
Moria far  away. He  sat upon the ground for a long while, silent, his  head
bowed, striving  to recall  all that Gandalf had  said to him. But  for this
choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed Gandalf's guidance had  been taken
from them too  soon, too  soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away.
How they should enter it at the last  Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could
not say. Into the stronghold of  the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he
had  once  ventured.  But  into  Mordor,  to  the Mountain  of  Fire and  to
Barad-dyr, since the Dark Lord  rose in power again, had  he ever  journeyed
there?  Frodo did not think  so. And here he was  a little halfling from the
Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where
the  great ones could  not go, or dared not go. It was an evil  fate. But he
had  taken it  on himself in his  own sitting-room in the far-off spring  of
another  year,  so remote now that it was like a chapter  in a story  of the
world's  youth, when the Trees  of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This
was  an evil choice. Which way should  he choose? And if both  led to terror
and death, what good lay in choice?
The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little  grey hollow where
they lay,  so  near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could
be felt, as if it  were a  thick veil that cut  them off from all the  world
about them. Above them was a dome  of pale sky  barred  with fleeting smoke,
but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy
with brooding thought.
Not even an eagle  poised against the sun would have marked the hobbits
sitting there, under  the weight of doom, silent, µ not moving, shrouded  in
their  thin  grey  cloaks. For a moment he  might  have  paused  to consider
Gollum,  a  tiny  figure sprawling  on  the ground:  there  perhaps  lay the
famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to
it, its long arms and legs almost bone-white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a
peck.
Frodo's head  was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands
behind  his head, staring  out of his hood at the empty sky.  At least for a
long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a  dark bird-like
figure wheel into the circle of his  sight, and hover, and  then wheel  away
again.  Two more followed,  and then a fourth. They were very  small to look
at,  yet  he knew,  somehow, that  they  were huge,  with a  vast stretch of
pinion,  flying  at a great height.  He covered his eyes and  bent  forward,
cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of
the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind
