bowed, striving  to recall  all that Gandalf had  said to him. But  for this
choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed Gandalf's guidance had  been taken
from them too  soon, too  soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away.
How they should enter it at the last  Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could
not say. Into the stronghold of  the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he
had  once  ventured.  But  into  Mordor,  to  the Mountain  of  Fire and  to
Barad-dyr, since the Dark Lord  rose in power again, had  he ever  journeyed
there?  Frodo did not think  so. And here he was  a little halfling from the
Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where
the  great ones could  not go, or dared not go. It was an evil  fate. But he
had  taken it  on himself in his  own sitting-room in the far-off spring  of
another  year,  so remote now that it was like a chapter  in a story  of the
world's  youth, when the Trees  of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This
was  an evil choice. Which way should  he choose? And if both  led to terror
and death, what good lay in choice?
The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little  grey hollow where
they lay,  so  near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could
be felt, as if it  were a  thick veil that cut  them off from all the  world
about them. Above them was a dome  of pale sky  barred  with fleeting smoke,
but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy
with brooding thought.
Not even an eagle  poised against the sun would have marked the hobbits
sitting there, under  the weight of doom, silent, µ not moving, shrouded  in
their  thin  grey  cloaks. For a moment he  might  have  paused  to consider
Gollum,  a  tiny  figure sprawling  on  the ground:  there  perhaps  lay the
famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to
it, its long arms and legs almost bone-white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a
peck.
Frodo's head  was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands
behind  his head, staring  out of his hood at the empty sky.  At least for a
long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a  dark bird-like
figure wheel into the circle of his  sight, and hover, and  then wheel  away
again.  Two more followed,  and then a fourth. They were very  small to look
at,  yet  he knew,  somehow, that  they  were huge,  with a  vast stretch of
pinion,  flying  at a great height.  He covered his eyes and  bent  forward,
cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of
the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind
and the shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling:
the menace  was  more  remote.  But menace  it was. Frodo  felt it  too. His
thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not look up.  Gollum
huddled  himself together like a cornered spider. The winged shapes wheeled,
and stooped swiftly down, speeding back to Mordor.
Sam took a deep breath. `The Riders are about again, up in the air,' he
said in a hoarse whisper. 'I saw them. Do you think they  could see us? They
were very  high up. And if  they are Black Riders same as  before, then they
can't see much by daylight, can they? '
'No, perhaps not,' said Frodo.  `But their steeds  could see. And these
winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably  see more than any
other  creature.  They are like great  carrion birds. They  are  looking for
something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.'
The feeling of dread passed, but the enfolding  silence was broken. For
some  time  they had been cut  off  from  the  world, as if  in an invisible
island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned.  But  still Frodo
did not  speak to Gollum or make his choice. His eyes were closed, as if  he
were dreaming, or looking  inward into his  heart  and memory.  At  last  he
stirred  and  stood up,  and  it seemed that  he was  about to  speak and to
decide. But `hark!' he said. `What is that?'
A new  fear  was upon  them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At
first it seemed a long way off,  but it drew  nearer:  it was coming towards
them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black Wings had spied them and
had sent armed soldiers to seize  them: no speed seemed too great  for these
terrible servants of Sauron.  They  crouched, listening.  The voices and the
clink  of weapons and harness were very close.  Frodo and Sam loosened their
small swords in their sheaths. Flight was impossible.
Gollum  rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the  lip of  the hollow.
Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch,  until he could peer over it
between  two  broken points of stone. He remained there without  moving  for
some time, making no sound.  Presently the voices began to recede again, and
then they slowly faded away. Far off  a  horn  blew on  the ramparts of  the
Morannon. Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow.
'More  Men  going to Mordor,' he said in a low  voice. `Dark faces.  We
have not seen Men like  these before, no, Smjagol has not.  They are fierce.
They have  black  eyes, and long  black hair, and gold rings in  their ears;
yes, lots  of beautiful gold. And  some have  red paint on their cheeks, and
red cloaks; and their  flags are red, and the tips of their spears; and they
have round shields,  yellow and black with big  spikes. Not nice; very cruel
wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Smjagol
thinks
they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end:  they came  up
that  road. They have passed  on  to the  Black Gate; but  more may  follow.
Always  more  people  coming  to Mordor.  One  day  all the peoples  will be
inside.'
`Were there any oliphaunts?' asked  Sam,  forgetting his  fear  in  his
eagerness for news of strange places.
`No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum.
Sam stood up, putting his hands  behind his back (as he always did when
'speaking poetry'), and began:
Grey as a mouse,
Big as a house.
Nose like a snake,
I make the earth shake,
As I tramp through the grass;
Trees crack as I pass.
With horns in my mouth
I walk in the South,
Flapping big ears.
Beyond count of years
I stump round and round,
Never lie on the ground,
Not even to die.
Oliphaunt am I,
Biggest of all,
Huge, old, and tall.
If ever you'd met me
You wouldn't forget me.
If you never do,
You won't think I'm true;
But old Oliphaunt am I,
And I never lie.
'That,'  said Sam, when he  had finished  reciting, `that's a rhyme  we
have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too,
