red cloaks; and their  flags are red, and the tips of their spears; and they
have round shields,  yellow and black with big  spikes. Not nice; very cruel
wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Smjagol
thinks
they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end:  they came  up
that  road. They have passed  on  to the  Black Gate; but  more may  follow.
Always  more  people  coming  to Mordor.  One  day  all the peoples  will be
inside.'
`Were there any oliphaunts?' asked  Sam,  forgetting his  fear  in  his
eagerness for news of strange places.
`No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum.
Sam stood up, putting his hands  behind his back (as he always did when
'speaking poetry'), and began:
Grey as a mouse,
Big as a house.
Nose like a snake,
I make the earth shake,
As I tramp through the grass;
Trees crack as I pass.
With horns in my mouth
I walk in the South,
Flapping big ears.
Beyond count of years
I stump round and round,
Never lie on the ground,
Not even to die.
Oliphaunt am I,
Biggest of all,
Huge, old, and tall.
If ever you'd met me
You wouldn't forget me.
If you never do,
You won't think I'm true;
But old Oliphaunt am I,
And I never lie.
'That,'  said Sam, when he  had finished  reciting, `that's a rhyme  we
have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too,
and news out of the South, you know.  In the old days hobbits used  to go on
their travels now and again. Not that many ever came back,  and not that all
they said  was believed:       news from Bree       ,  and not  sure  as Shiretalk     , as the
sayings  go. But I've heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands.
Swertings we call 'em in our tales;  and they ride on oliphaunts, 'tis said,
when they fight. They put houses and towers  on  the oliphauntses backs  and
all,  and  the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So  when you
said  "Men out of the  South, all  in red and gold;" I said  "were there any
oliphaunts? " For if there was, I was going to  take a look, risk or no. But
now I don't suppose I'll ever see  an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain't no such a
beast.' He sighed.
`No, no oliphaunts,' said Gollum again. 'Smjagol has not heard of them.
He does not want to see them. He does not want  them to be. Smjagol wants to
go away from here and hide somewhere safer. Smjagol wants master to go.
Nice
master, won't he come with Smjagol? '
Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst  of  all his cares when Sam
trotted out the old fireside rhyme  of         Oliphaunt    , and the laugh had released
him from hesitation. `I  wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a
white one at their head,' he  said.  `Then  we'd break  a way into this evil
land,  perhaps.  But  we've not; just our  own tired legs, that's all. Well,
Smjagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.'
'Good  master,  wise master,  nice master!'  cried  Gollum in  delight,
patting Frodo's knees. `Good master! Then rest  now, nice hobbits, under the
shadow of  the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till  the
Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft  and quick as shadows
we
must be!'
Chapter 4. Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit
For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into
the shade as the sun moved, until  at last the shadow of the western  rim of
their  dell grew long, and darkness filled all  the hollow. Then they ate  a
little,  and drank  sparingly.  Gollum  ate nothing, but  he  accepted water
gladly.
`Soon get more now,' he said, licking  his lips. `Good water  runs down
in  streams to  the Great River,  nice water in the lands  we are  going to.
Smjagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes,                   gollum  !' He
set his two large flat hands on his  shrunken belly, and a pale  green light
came into his eyes.
The  dusk was deep  when at length  they  set  out,  creeping over  the
westward rim of the  dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken country on
the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it
did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the  early night
was very dark. A single red light burned high up in the Towers of the Teeth,
but  otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch  on the
Morannon.
For  many  miles the red eye  seemed  to  stare at  them as they  fled,
stumbling through a barren  stony country.  They did not dare  to  take  the
road, but they  kept  it  on their left, following its line as  well as they
could at a little distance.  At last, when  night  was growing old and  they
were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled
to a small fiery point and then vanished: they had turned the dark  northern
shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards.
With hearts  strangely  lightened they  now rested again, but  not  for
long. They were  not going  quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was
nearly thirty leagues from the  Morannon to the cross-roads above Osgiliath,
and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled
on once  more,  until the  dawn  began  to  spread  slowly in the wide  grey
solitude. They had then  walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits  could
not have gone any further, even if they had dared.
The  growing  light revealed to them  a  land already, less  barren and
ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their  left, but near at
hand  they could  see the southward road,  now  bearing away  from the black
