Chapter 4. Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit
For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into
the shade as the sun moved, until  at last the shadow of the western  rim of
their  dell grew long, and darkness filled all  the hollow. Then they ate  a
little,  and drank  sparingly.  Gollum  ate nothing, but  he  accepted water
gladly.
`Soon get more now,' he said, licking  his lips. `Good water  runs down
in  streams to  the Great River,  nice water in the lands  we are  going to.
Smjagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes,                   gollum  !' He
set his two large flat hands on his  shrunken belly, and a pale  green light
came into his eyes.
The  dusk was deep  when at length  they  set  out,  creeping over  the
westward rim of the  dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken country on
the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it
did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the  early night
was very dark. A single red light burned high up in the Towers of the Teeth,
but  otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch  on the
Morannon.
For  many  miles the red eye  seemed  to  stare at  them as they  fled,
stumbling through a barren  stony country.  They did not dare  to  take  the
road, but they  kept  it  on their left, following its line as  well as they
could at a little distance.  At last, when  night  was growing old and  they
were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled
to a small fiery point and then vanished: they had turned the dark  northern
shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards.
With hearts  strangely  lightened they  now rested again, but  not  for
long. They were  not going  quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was
nearly thirty leagues from the  Morannon to the cross-roads above Osgiliath,
and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled
on once  more,  until the  dawn  began  to  spread  slowly in the wide  grey
solitude. They had then  walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits  could
not have gone any further, even if they had dared.
The  growing  light revealed to them  a  land already, less  barren and
ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their  left, but near at
hand  they could  see the southward road,  now  bearing away  from the black
roots of the  hills and  slanting  westwards.  Beyond it were slopes covered
with  sombre trees  like  dark clouds. but  all about  them  lay  a  tumbled
heathland, grown with ling and broom  and cornel, and other shrubs that they
did not know. Here and there they saw knots  of tall pine-trees.  The hearts
of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness: the  air was fresh
and  fragrant, and it reminded them  of the uplands of the Northfarthing far
away. It seemed good to be reprieved, to  walk in a land that had  only been
for a few years  under the dominion of  the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen
wholly into  decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate
that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy heights.
They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes
while the light lasted.
The  day passed uneasily. They lay deep  in the heather and counted out
the  slow hours, in which  there seemed  little  change; for they were still
under the shadows of the Ephel D®ath, and the sun was veiled. Frodo slept at
times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble
about him; but Sam found it difficult to do more than doze, even when Gollum
was plainly fast  asleep,  whiffling  and twitching in  his  secret  dreams.
Hunger,  perhaps,  more than mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long
for a good homely meal, `something hot out of the pot'.
As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming night, they
started  out  again. In  a little while  Gollum led  them  down  on  to  the
southward road; and after that they went  on more quickly, though the danger
was greater. Their ears were strained  for the sound of hoof or  foot on the
road  ahead, or following them  from behind;  but the night passed, and they
heard no sound of walker or rider.
The  road had been made in  a long lost  time:  and  for perhaps thirty
miles below  the  Morannon it had been  newly repaired, but as it went south
the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen
in its straight sure  flight and level course:  now and again it cut its way
through hillside slopes, or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of
enduring masonry; but at  last  all signs  of stonework faded,  save  for  a
broken pillar  here and  there,  peering out of bushes  at  the side, or old
paving-stones still  lurking  amid weeds  and moss.  Heather  and  trees and
bracken  scrambled down  and  overhung  the banks, or sprawled out over  the
surface. It dwindled at last to a country cart-road little  used; but it did
not wind:  it held on its  own sure course and  guided them by  the swiftest
way.
So  they  passed into the  northern marches  of that land that Men once
called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift-falling streams.
The  night  became  fine  under  star and round moon, and  it seemed  to the
hobbits that the  fragrance  of the air grew as they went  forward; and from
the  blowing and muttering of Gollum it  seemed that he noticed it  too, and
did not relish it. At the first signs  of day  they halted  again.  They had
come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer-sided in  the middle,  by
which the road clove its way through a stony  ridge. Now they climbed up the
westward bank and looked abroad.
Day  was  opening in the sky, and they saw  that the mountains were now
much further  off, receding eastward in  a long curve  that was lost in  the
distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran  down into dim
hazes far  below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and
cedar  and cypress. and other  kinds  unknown in the Shire, with wide glades
among them; and  everywhere there was a wealth  of sweet-smelling  herbs and
shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of  their
own  land,  but not until now in this more sheltered region had the  hobbits
felt the change of clime.  Here Spring was  already busy about them:  fronds
pierced  moss  and mould,  larches were  green-fingered, small flowers  were
opening in the turf,  birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now
desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.
South  and  west  it looked  towards  the  warm lower vales  of Anduin,
shielded  from   the  east  by  the  Ephel  D®ath  and  yet  not  under  the
mountain-shadow,  protected  from the north  by the  Emyn Muil, open  to the
southern  airs and the moist winds from the Sea far  away.  Many great trees
grew there,  planted  long ago,  falling  into untended age amid a  riot  of
careless descendants;  and groves and  thickets there  were of tamarisk  and
pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles;
and  thymes that grew in  bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled
in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue
flowers, or  red,  or pale green; and  marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys,
and many  herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots
and  rocky  walls were  already  starred  with  saxifrages  and  stonecrops.
Primeroles  and anemones were awake in the  filbert-brakes; and asphodel and
many  lily-flowers  nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep  green
grass beside  the pools,  where  falling streams  halted  in cool hollows on
