way.
So  they  passed into the  northern marches  of that land that Men once
called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift-falling streams.
The  night  became  fine  under  star and round moon, and  it seemed  to the
hobbits that the  fragrance  of the air grew as they went  forward; and from
the  blowing and muttering of Gollum it  seemed that he noticed it  too, and
did not relish it. At the first signs  of day  they halted  again.  They had
come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer-sided in  the middle,  by
which the road clove its way through a stony  ridge. Now they climbed up the
westward bank and looked abroad.
Day  was  opening in the sky, and they saw  that the mountains were now
much further  off, receding eastward in  a long curve  that was lost in  the
distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran  down into dim
hazes far  below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and
cedar  and cypress. and other  kinds  unknown in the Shire, with wide glades
among them; and  everywhere there was a wealth  of sweet-smelling  herbs and
shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of  their
own  land,  but not until now in this more sheltered region had the  hobbits
felt the change of clime.  Here Spring was  already busy about them:  fronds
pierced  moss  and mould,  larches were  green-fingered, small flowers  were
opening in the turf,  birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now
desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.
South  and  west  it looked  towards  the  warm lower vales  of Anduin,
shielded  from   the  east  by  the  Ephel  D®ath  and  yet  not  under  the
mountain-shadow,  protected  from the north  by the  Emyn Muil, open  to the
southern  airs and the moist winds from the Sea far  away.  Many great trees
grew there,  planted  long ago,  falling  into untended age amid a  riot  of
careless descendants;  and groves and  thickets there  were of tamarisk  and
pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles;
and  thymes that grew in  bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled
in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue
flowers, or  red,  or pale green; and  marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys,
and many  herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots
and  rocky  walls were  already  starred  with  saxifrages  and  stonecrops.
Primeroles  and anemones were awake in the  filbert-brakes; and asphodel and
many  lily-flowers  nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep  green
grass beside  the pools,  where  falling streams  halted  in cool hollows on
their journey down to Anduin.
The  travellers  turned their backs on the road and  went downhill.  As
they walked, brushing their  way through bush  and herb,  sweet  odours rose
about  them. Gollum coughed and retched; but the hobbits  breathed deep, and
suddenly Sam laughed, for heart's ease not for jest. They followed a  stream
that went  quickly down before them. Presently  it  brought them to a  small
clear lake in a shallow dell: it lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone
basin, the carven rim of  which was  almost wholly  covered  with mosses and
rose-brambles;  iris-swords stood in  ranks about it. and water-lily  leaves
floated on  its dark gently-rippling surface; but it was deep and fresh, and
spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end.
Here they washed  themselves and  drank  their  fill at  the in-falling
freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place: for  this
land, fair-seeming  still, was nonetheless now territory of  the Enemy. They
had not come  very far from the road, and yet even  in so short a space they
had seen  scars of  the  old wars, and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and
other foul servants of the Dark Lord:  a  pit of uncovered filth and refuse;
trees hewn down wantonly  and  left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign
of the Eye cut in rude strokes on their bark.
Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the
unfamiliar  plants  and  trees,  forgetful for  the moment  of  Mordor,  was
reminded suddenly  of their ever-present peril. He  stumbled on a ring still
scorched by fire,  and in the midst of it  he  found  a pile  of charred and
broken  bones  and skulls.  The  swift growth  of the wild  with  briar  and
eglantine and trailing  clematis was already drawing a veil  over this place
of dreadful feast and slaughter;  but it was not ancient. He hurried back to
his companions, but he said nothing: the bones  were best  left in peace and
not pawed and routed by Gollum.
`Let's  find a place to lie up in,' he said. 'Not lower down. Higher up
for me.'
A  little way back above the lake they found a  deep brown bed  of last
year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved  bay-trees climbing up a
steep bank  that was crowned with old cedars. Here they  decided to rest and
pass  the day, which already promised to be  bright and warm. A good day for
strolling  on their way along the groves and glades of Ithilien; but  though
Orcs may shun the sunlight. there were too many places here where they could
lie hid  and  watch;  and  other  evil  eyes were  abroad:  Sauron had  many
servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under  the  Yellow. Face. Soon
it  would look over the dark  ridges of the Ephel D®ath, and he would  faint
and cower in the light and heat.
Sam had  been giving earnest thought to food as they  marched. Now that
the despair  of  the  impassable Gate was behind  him,  he did  not feel  so
inclined as his master  to take no thought  for  their livelihood beyond the
end of their errand;  and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread
of the  Elves for worse times ahead.  Six  days or more had  passed since he
reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks.
'If we  reach the Fire in  that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he
thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! '
Besides,  at  the  end  of a  long  night-march, and  after bathing and
drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper,  or a breakfast, by
the fire  in  the old kitchen  at  Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An
idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun  to sneak off
on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern.
`Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going?  Hunting? Well see here,
old  noser, you don't like our  food,  and I'd  not  be sorry  for  a change
myself.  Your new motto's          always ready to help       . Could you find anything  fit
for a hungry hobbit? '
`Yes, perhaps,  yes,' said Gollum. `Smjagol always helps, if they  asks
-- if they asks nicely.'
`Right!' said Sam `I does ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I begs.'
Gollum disappeared.  He  was away some  time, and  Frodo  after  a  few
mouthfuls of     lembas    settled deep into the brown  fern and went to sleep. Sam
looked  at  him. The early  daylight  was only just creeping  down into  the
shadows under the trees, but he saw his master's face very clearly, and  his
hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly
of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in  the  house of Elrond,  after his  deadly
wound. Then as  he  had  kept watch Sam  had  noticed that at times  a light
seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light  was even clearer and
stronger. Frodo's face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it;
but it looked old,  old and beautiful, as  if the  chiselling of the shaping
years was now revealed  in  many  fine lines  that  had before  been hidden,
though the  identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it
that  way to himself.  He shook  his  head, as if finding words useless, and
murmured:  `I  love  him. He's  like that, and  sometimes it shines through,
