servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under  the  Yellow. Face. Soon
it  would look over the dark  ridges of the Ephel D®ath, and he would  faint
and cower in the light and heat.
Sam had  been giving earnest thought to food as they  marched. Now that
the despair  of  the  impassable Gate was behind  him,  he did  not feel  so
inclined as his master  to take no thought  for  their livelihood beyond the
end of their errand;  and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread
of the  Elves for worse times ahead.  Six  days or more had  passed since he
reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks.
'If we  reach the Fire in  that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he
thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! '
Besides,  at  the  end  of a  long  night-march, and  after bathing and
drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper,  or a breakfast, by
the fire  in  the old kitchen  at  Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An
idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun  to sneak off
on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern.
`Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going?  Hunting? Well see here,
old  noser, you don't like our  food,  and I'd  not  be sorry  for  a change
myself.  Your new motto's          always ready to help       . Could you find anything  fit
for a hungry hobbit? '
`Yes, perhaps,  yes,' said Gollum. `Smjagol always helps, if they  asks
-- if they asks nicely.'
`Right!' said Sam `I does ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I begs.'
Gollum disappeared.  He  was away some  time, and  Frodo  after  a  few
mouthfuls of     lembas    settled deep into the brown  fern and went to sleep. Sam
looked  at  him. The early  daylight  was only just creeping  down into  the
shadows under the trees, but he saw his master's face very clearly, and  his
hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly
of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in  the  house of Elrond,  after his  deadly
wound. Then as  he  had  kept watch Sam  had  noticed that at times  a light
seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light  was even clearer and
stronger. Frodo's face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it;
but it looked old,  old and beautiful, as  if the  chiselling of the shaping
years was now revealed  in  many  fine lines  that  had before  been hidden,
though the  identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it
that  way to himself.  He shook  his  head, as if finding words useless, and
murmured:  `I  love  him. He's  like that, and  sometimes it shines through,
somehow. But I love him, whether or no.'
Gollum returned quietly  and  peered over  Sam's  shoulder.  Looking at
Frodo, he shut his eyes  and crawled away without a sound. Sam came to him a
moment later and found him  chewing something  and muttering  to himself.
On
the ground beside him lay two small rabbits, which he was  beginning to  eye
greedily.
'Smjagol always helps,' he said. `He has brought rabbits, nice rabbits.
But master has gone  to sleep,  and perhaps Sam wants to sleep. Doesn't want
rabbits now?  Smjagol  tries  to help,  but he can't catch  things all in  a
minute.'
Sam,  however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least
not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of  course,  can cook, for they  begin to
learn the art before their letters (which  many never reach):  but Sam was a
good  cook, even by  hobbit  reckoning,  and he had  done a good deal of the
camp-cooking on their travels, when there was a chance. He  still  hopefully
carried some of his gear in his pack: a  small tinder-box, two small shallow
pans,  the smaller fitting into  the  larger; inside them  a wooden spoon, a
short  two-pronged  fork and  some skewers were  stowed;  and hidden  at the
bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But
he needed a  fire, and other things besides. He thought for  a bit, while he
took out his  knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the rabbits.
He was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few minutes.
'Now,  Gollum,'  he said, 'I've  another job for you. Go and fill these
pans with water, and bring 'em back! '
'Smjagol will fetch water, yes,' said Gollum. 'But what does the hobbit
want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.'
'Never you mind,' said Sam. `If you  can't guess, you'll soon find out.
And  the  sooner you fetch the  water,  the  sooner you'll  learn. Don't you
damage one of my pans, or I'll carve you into mincemeat.'
While Gollum was  away Sam took  another look  at Frodo.  He  was still
sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck  most  by the leanness  of his face
and hands. 'Too thin and drawn he is,' he muttered. 'Not right for a hobbit.
If I can get these coneys cooked, I'm going to wake him up.'
Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled  up the bank
collecting a  bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen branch of a  cedar
at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves at the foot of the
bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid  his fuel
in it. Being handy with flint and tinder he soon had a small blaze going. It
made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping
over  his  fire,  shielding it and  building  it up with heavier  wood, when
Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.
He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave
a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss
-- no!' he cried. `No! Silly  hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do
it!'
`Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise.
`Not make  the nassty  red  tongues,'  hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's
dangerous, yes it is. It burns, it kills. And it will  bring enemies, yes it
will.'
'I don't think so,' said  Sam. `Don't see  why it  should, if you don't
put wet stuff on it and make a  smother.  But if it does, it does. I'm going
to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.'
'Stew the rabbits!'  squealed Gollum in  dismay. `Spoil  beautiful meat
Smjagol  saved for  you,  poor  hungry  Smjagol! What for? What  for,  silly
hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!'
He clawed at the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire.
`Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes  you,
and raw  coney chokes me. If you give  me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to
cook,  if  I have  a mind. And  I have.  You needn't watch me.  Go and catch
another  and eat it as you  fancy -- somewhere private  and out o' my sight.
Then you  won't see the  fire, and  I shan't see you, and we'll both  be the
happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.'
Gollum withdrew grumbling,  and  crawled  into  the  fern.  Sam  busied
himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself,
`is some  herbs and roots,  especially taters -- not to mention bread. Herbs
we can manage, seemingly.'
`Gollum!'  he  called softly. `Third  time pays  for all. I  want  some
herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the  fern,  but  his looks  were neither
helpful  nor friendly.  `A few  bay-leaves, some  thyme and sage, will do --
before the water boils,' said Sam.
`No! ' said  Gollum. `Smjagol is  not pleased. And Smjagol doesn't like
smelly leaves. He doesn't eat  grasses or roots,  no precious, not till he's
starving or very sick, poor Smjagol. '
