The  woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and
thicker;  and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills,
there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At
last the Elves turned aside from the path.  A  green ride  lay almost unseen
through the  thickets on the right; and this they  followed as it wound away
back up the  wooded slopes on to the  top of a shoulder of  the  hills  that
stood out into the lower land of the river-valley. Suddenly they came out of
the shadow of  the trees, and  before them lay a  wide space of  grass, grey
under the night. On three sides the woods  pressed upon it; but eastward the
ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of
the slope,  were  below their feet. Beyond, the  low lands  lay dim and flat
under the stars.  Nearer  at hand  a few lights twinkled  in the village  of
Woodhall.
The  Elves sat on  the grass  and spoke  together in  soft voices; they
seemed to take no further  notice of the hobbits.  Frodo and his  companions
wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness stole  over  them.
The  night grew  on,  and  the  lights in the valley  went out. Pippin  fell
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock.
Away  high  in the East swung Remmirath,  the Netted Stars,  and slowly
above  the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some
shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned  up,
as  he  climbed  over the  rim  of the  world, the  Swordsman  of  the  Sky,
Menelvagor with  his shining  belt. The  Elves all burst into song. Suddenly
under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light.
'Come!' the  Elves called to the hobbits. 'Come!  Now is  the time  for
speech and merriment!'
Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. 'There is a fire in the
hall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him.
At the south  end of the greensward  there  was an opening.  There  the
green  floor  ran on into the wood, and formed a  wide  space like  a  hall,
roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each
side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning  steadily. The Elves sat
round the  fire upon the grass or  upon the  sawn  rings of old trunks. Some
went  to  and  fro bearing cups and  pouring  drink; others brought  food on
heaped plates and dishes.
'This  is poor fare,' they said  to the hobbits; 'for we are lodging in
the greenwood far from  our halls. If ever  you are our guests at  home,  we
will treat you better.'
'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo.
Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for his mind
was  filled  with the  light upon the elf-faces, and the  sound of voices so
various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking  dream.  But he remembered
that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white  loaf to one who
is starving;  and fruits  sweet  as  wildberries  and richer than the tended
fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was filled with a fragrant draught,
cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer afternoon.
Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what
he felt or thought that  night, though it remained in  his  memory as one of
the chief  events of his life.  The  nearest he  ever got was to say: 'Well,
sir, if I could grow  apples like that, I would call  myself a gardener. But
it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.'
Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind was
chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened
eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in
their own language. They smiled at  him  and said laughing: 'Here is a jewel
among hobbits!'
After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away
to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and  slept the
rest  of the night away. Sam refused to  leave  his  master. When Pippin had
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor.
They  spoke of many things, old  and new,  and Frodo questioned  Gildor
much about happenings  in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were
mostly  sad and ominous: of  gathering  darkness, the wars  of Men,  and the
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked  the question  that  was nearest to
his heart:
'Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?'
Gildor  smiled.  'Yes,' he answered.  'Twice. He said farewell to us on
this very  spot. But I saw  him once again, far  from here.' He would say no
more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.
'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' said
Gildor. 'But I already know a little, and I  can read more in your  face and
in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you
doubt that you will find  what you seek, or accomplish what  you intend,  or
that you will ever return. Is not that so?'
'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to
Gandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring
gently.
'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor.
'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?'
'I  do not know  for what  reason the Enemy is pursuing you,'  answered
Gildor; 'but I perceive that he is - strange indeed though that seems to me.
And I warn  you  that peril is now both before you  and behind you, and upon
either side.'
'You  mean the Riders? I feared  that  they were servants of the Enemy.
What    are  the Black Riders?'
'Has Gandalf told you nothing?'
'Nothing about such creatures.'
'Then I think it  is not  for me to say more  - lest terror should keep
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only just in
time, if  indeed you are in time. You must now make  haste, and neither stay
nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.'
'I cannot  imagine what information could be more terrifying  than your
hints  and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew  that  danger lay  ahead,  of
course; but I did not expect to  meet it in  our  own Shire.  Can't a hobbit
walk from the Water to the River in peace?'
'But  it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here before
hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The
wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for
ever fence it out.'
'I know - and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What can I
do  now?  My  plan was  to  leave  the Shire  secretly, and  make my  way to
Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.'
'I  think you should still follow that  plan,'  said Gildor.  'I do not
think the Road  will prove too  hard for  your courage. But  if  you  desire
clearer counsel, you should ask  Gandalf. I do not know the reason  for your
flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your  pursuers will assail
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you  will see him before
you leave the Shire?'
'I hope so. But that is another  thing that  makes  me anxious. I  have
