bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid  his fuel
in it. Being handy with flint and tinder he soon had a small blaze going. It
made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping
over  his  fire,  shielding it and  building  it up with heavier  wood, when
Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.
He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave
a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss
-- no!' he cried. `No! Silly  hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do
it!'
`Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise.
`Not make  the nassty  red  tongues,'  hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's
dangerous, yes it is. It burns, it kills. And it will  bring enemies, yes it
will.'
'I don't think so,' said  Sam. `Don't see  why it  should, if you don't
put wet stuff on it and make a  smother.  But if it does, it does. I'm going
to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.'
'Stew the rabbits!'  squealed Gollum in  dismay. `Spoil  beautiful meat
Smjagol  saved for  you,  poor  hungry  Smjagol! What for? What  for,  silly
hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!'
He clawed at the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire.
`Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes  you,
and raw  coney chokes me. If you give  me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to
cook,  if  I have  a mind. And  I have.  You needn't watch me.  Go and catch
another  and eat it as you  fancy -- somewhere private  and out o' my sight.
Then you  won't see the  fire, and  I shan't see you, and we'll both  be the
happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.'
Gollum withdrew grumbling,  and  crawled  into  the  fern.  Sam  busied
himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself,
`is some  herbs and roots,  especially taters -- not to mention bread. Herbs
we can manage, seemingly.'
`Gollum!'  he  called softly. `Third  time pays  for all. I  want  some
herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the  fern,  but  his looks  were neither
helpful  nor friendly.  `A few  bay-leaves, some  thyme and sage, will do --
before the water boils,' said Sam.
`No! ' said  Gollum. `Smjagol is  not pleased. And Smjagol doesn't like
smelly leaves. He doesn't eat  grasses or roots,  no precious, not till he's
starving or very sick, poor Smjagol. '
`Smjagol'll get  into real true hot water, when this water boils, if he
don't do  as  he's  asked,' growled  Sam.  `Sam'll put  his head in it,  yes
precious. And I'd make him look for turnips  and carrots, and taters too, if
it was  the time o'  the  year. I'll bet there's all sorts  of  good  things
running wild in this country. I'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.'
`Smjagol won't  go, O no precious, not this time,' hissed Gollum. `He's
frightened, and  he's very tired, and this hobbit's  not nice,  not nice  at
all.  Smjagol won't  grub for roots and  carrotses  and  --  taters.  What's
taters, precious, eh, what's taters?
`Po-ta-toes,' said Sam. 'The  Gaffer's delight, and  rare  good ballast
for an empty belly. But you won't find any, so you needn't look. But be good
Smjagol  and  fetch me the herbs, and I'll think better of you. What's more,
if you turn  over a new leaf, and keep it turned, I'll cook you  some taters
one of  these days. I will: fried fish  and chips served by  S.  Gamgee. You
couldn't say no to that.'
`Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish                 now   ,
and keep nassty chips! '
`Oh you're hopeless,' said Sam. 'Go to sleep!'
In  the end he had to find what  he wanted for himself;  but he did not
have to  go far, not out  of sight of the  place where his master lay, still
sleeping. For a while  Sam sat musing, and  tending the fire till  the water
boiled. The daylight grew  and the  air became  warm; the dew faded off turf
and leaf. Soon  the  rabbits  cut  up  lay simmering in their pans with  the
bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the  time went by. He let them stew
for close on an hour, testing them now and again with  his fork, and tasting
the broth.
When  he thought  all  was ready he lifted the pans off  the  fire, and
crept along to Frodo. Frodo  half opened his eyes as Sam stood over him, and
then he  wakened from  his  dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of
peace.
`Hullo, Sam! ' he said. `Not resting? Is  anything wrong?  What  is the
time? '
`About a couple of hours after daybreak,' said  Sam, `and  nigh on half
past  eight  by  Shire  clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Though  it ain't
quite what I'd call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I've got a bit of
a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo.  Do you good. You'll have  to sup
it in your mug; or straight from the pan, when it's  cooled a bit. I haven't
brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.'
Frodo  yawned and stretched.  'You  should  have been  resting Sam,' he
said. 'And lighting  a fire  was dangerous  in these  parts.  But I do  feel
hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? '
'A  present from Smjagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I
fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a
few herbs.'
Sam and  his master sat just within  the  fern-brake and ate their stew
from the pans, sharing the  old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half
a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast.
'Wheew!  Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time
to  change your  mind.  There's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.'
There was no answer.
`Oh  well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll
finish it,' said Sam.
`And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo.
`Don't you drop off, while  I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo. I  don't  feel  too
sure  of  him.  There's  a  good  deal  of  Stinker-the bad  Gollum, if  you
understand me-in him still, and it's getting stronger again. Not but what  I
think he'd try to throttle  me first  now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's
not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.'
They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his  gear. As he
stood  up to return, he looked back up the  slope. At that moment he saw the
sun  rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that
lay  ever to the east, and it sent its  golden beams down upon the trees and
glades about him. Then  he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey,  smoke, plain
to see as it  caught  the sunlight, rising  from a thicket above him. With a
shock  he realized that  this was the smoke  from  his  little cooking-fire,
which he had neglected to put out.
`That won't do! Never thought  it  would show like that! ' he muttered,
and  he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard
a whistle  or not? Or was  it the  call of some strange  bird?  If it was  a
whistle, it did  not  come from Frodo's direction. There it went again  from
another place! Sam began to run as well as he could uphill.
He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled
some  fern  at  the edge  of the fire,  and the fern blazing  up had set the
turves  smouldering.  Hastily he stamped  out  what  was left of  the  fire,
