brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.'
Frodo  yawned and stretched.  'You  should  have been  resting Sam,' he
said. 'And lighting  a fire  was dangerous  in these  parts.  But I do  feel
hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? '
'A  present from Smjagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I
fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a
few herbs.'
Sam and  his master sat just within  the  fern-brake and ate their stew
from the pans, sharing the  old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half
a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast.
'Wheew!  Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time
to  change your  mind.  There's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.'
There was no answer.
`Oh  well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll
finish it,' said Sam.
`And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo.
`Don't you drop off, while  I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo. I  don't  feel  too
sure  of  him.  There's  a  good  deal  of  Stinker-the bad  Gollum, if  you
understand me-in him still, and it's getting stronger again. Not but what  I
think he'd try to throttle  me first  now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's
not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.'
They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his  gear. As he
stood  up to return, he looked back up the  slope. At that moment he saw the
sun  rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that
lay  ever to the east, and it sent its  golden beams down upon the trees and
glades about him. Then  he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey,  smoke, plain
to see as it  caught  the sunlight, rising  from a thicket above him. With a
shock  he realized that  this was the smoke  from  his  little cooking-fire,
which he had neglected to put out.
`That won't do! Never thought  it  would show like that! ' he muttered,
and  he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard
a whistle  or not? Or was  it the  call of some strange  bird?  If it was  a
whistle, it did  not  come from Frodo's direction. There it went again  from
another place! Sam began to run as well as he could uphill.
He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled
some  fern  at  the edge  of the fire,  and the fern blazing  up had set the
turves  smouldering.  Hastily he stamped  out  what  was left of  the  fire,
scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole.  Then he crept back to
Frodo.
'Did  you hear a whistle, and  what sounded like an answer? ' he asked.
`A few minutes back. I hope  it was only a bird,  but it didn't  sound quite
like that: more like  somebody mimicking  a  bird-call, I  thought.  And I'm
afraid my bit of fire's been smoking. Now if I've gone  and brought trouble,
I'll never forgive myself. Nor won't have a chance, maybe! '
`Hush! ' whispered Frodo. `I thought I heard voices.'
The  two  hobbits  trussed their  small packs,  put  them  on ready for
flight,  and  then  crawled  deeper  into  the  fern.  There  they  crouched
listening.
There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and furtively,
but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly
close at hand.
`Here! Here is where the smoke came from! ' it said. `'Twill be nigh at
hand. In the fern, no  doubt. We shall have it like  a coney in a trap. Then
we shall learn what kind of thing it is.'
`Aye, and what it knows! ' said a second voice.
At  once  four  men  came  striding  through  the  fern from  different
directions. Since flight and hiding  were no longer  possible, Frodo and Sam
sprang  to their  feet,  putting  back to back and whipping out  their small
swords.
If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even  more
astonished.  Four tall Men  stood there. Two  had spears in their hands with
broad  bright heads. Two  had great bows,  almost of their  own height,  and
great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had swords at their sides,
and were clad in green  and  brown of varied hues, as if the better  to walk
unseen in the glades of Ithilien. Green  gauntlets covered  their hands, and
their faces were hooded and  masked with green, except for their eyes, which
were very keen and bright. At once  Frodo thought of  Boromir, for these Men
were like him in stature and bearing, and in their manner of speech.
`We have  not found what we sought,' said one. `But what have we found?
'
'Not Orcs,' said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had
seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand.
`Elves? ' said a third, doubtfully.
`Nay! Not Elves,'  said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared the
chief among them. `Elves do not  walk in Ithilien in these  days.  And Elves
are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.'
'Meaning  we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when
you've finished discussing us,  perhaps you'll say who you are, and  why you
can't let two tired travellers rest.'
The tall  green man laughed grimly.  `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,'
he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the
Dark Tower, or of the White.'
`But  we are  neither,' said Frodo.  `And  travellers  we are, whatever
Captain Faramir may say.'
'Then make  haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir.
'We  have  a  work  to  do,  and this is  no time or place  for riddling  or
parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? '
`The third? '
'Yes, the skulking fellow that  we saw with his  nose in  the pool down
yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a
creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.'
'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion
met  upon our road; and I  am  not answerable for  him. If you  come on him,
spare  him. Bring him  or send him  to  us.  He is  only  a wretched gangrel
creature, but I have  him under my care for a while. But as for  us,  we are
Hobbits of the Shire,  far to  the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo
son of Drogo is my name, and with  me is  Samwise son  of Hamfast, a  worthy
hobbit in my  service.  We  have come  by long ways --  out of Rivendell, or
Imladris as some call  it.'  Here  Faramir started  and grew  intent. 'Seven
companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left  at  Parth Galen
above Rauros:  two of  my kin; a  Dwarf there was also,  and an Elf, and two
Men.  They were  Aragorn;  and Boromir, who said  that he came out of  Minas
Tirith, a city in the South.'
'Boromir! ' all the four men exclaimed.
'Boromir son of  the Lord Denethor?' said  Faramir, and a strange stern
look came into his  face. 'You came with  him? That is news indeed, if it be
true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir  son of Denethor was High  Warden
of  the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are
you then,  and  what had you  to do  with  him?  Be swift, for  the  Sun  is
climbing!'
'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell?
