chief among them. `Elves do not  walk in Ithilien in these  days.  And Elves
are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.'
'Meaning  we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when
you've finished discussing us,  perhaps you'll say who you are, and  why you
can't let two tired travellers rest.'
The tall  green man laughed grimly.  `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,'
he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the
Dark Tower, or of the White.'
`But  we are  neither,' said Frodo.  `And  travellers  we are, whatever
Captain Faramir may say.'
'Then make  haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir.
'We  have  a  work  to  do,  and this is  no time or place  for riddling  or
parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? '
`The third? '
'Yes, the skulking fellow that  we saw with his  nose in  the pool down
yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a
creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.'
'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion
met  upon our road; and I  am  not answerable for  him. If you  come on him,
spare  him. Bring him  or send him  to  us.  He is  only  a wretched gangrel
creature, but I have  him under my care for a while. But as for  us,  we are
Hobbits of the Shire,  far to  the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo
son of Drogo is my name, and with  me is  Samwise son  of Hamfast, a  worthy
hobbit in my  service.  We  have come  by long ways --  out of Rivendell, or
Imladris as some call  it.'  Here  Faramir started  and grew  intent. 'Seven
companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left  at  Parth Galen
above Rauros:  two of  my kin; a  Dwarf there was also,  and an Elf, and two
Men.  They were  Aragorn;  and Boromir, who said  that he came out of  Minas
Tirith, a city in the South.'
'Boromir! ' all the four men exclaimed.
'Boromir son of  the Lord Denethor?' said  Faramir, and a strange stern
look came into his  face. 'You came with  him? That is news indeed, if it be
true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir  son of Denethor was High  Warden
of  the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are
you then,  and  what had you  to do  with  him?  Be swift, for  the  Sun  is
climbing!'
'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell?
' Frodo replied.
Seek for the Sword that was Broken.
In Imladris it dwells.
'The words are known indeed,' said Faramir in astonishment. `It is some
token of your truth that you also know them.'
`Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,' said
Frodo. 'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.'
`That I see,' said Faramir thoughtfully. `Or I see that it might be so.
And what is Isildur's Bane? '
`That is hidden,'  answered  Frodo. `Doubtless it will be made clear in
time.'
`We must  learn more of this,' said Faramir, `and know  what brings you
so far east under the shadow of yonder--,' he pointed and said no name. 'But
not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril.  and you would not have
gone far  by field or road this day.  There will be hard handstrokes nigh at
hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will
leave two to guard you, for your  good and for mine. Wise  man trusts not to
chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with
you.'
'Farewell!' said Frodo, bowing low. `Think what you will, I am a friend
of  all enemies of the One Enemy. We  would go with you, if we halfling folk
could hope to serve  you, such doughty men and strong as you seem, and if my
errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!'
'The  Halflings  are  courteous  folk,  whatever  else  they  be,' said
Faramir. `Farewell!'
The hobbits  sat  down  again, but  they said nothing to one another of
their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just  under the dappling  shadow of the
dark bay-trees, two men remained on guard. They took off their masks now and
again  to cool them,  as the  day-heat grew,  and Frodo  saw that  they were
goodly  men, pale-skinned, dark of hair, with  grey eyes and  faces sad  and
proud. They spoke together in soft voices, at first using the Common Speech,
but after the manner of older days, and then changing to another language of
their own. To his amazement, as he listened Frodo  became aware that  it was
the Elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he looked
at  them with wonder, for he  knew  then that  they must be D®nedain  of the
South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse.
After a  while  he spoke to  them; but they were slow  and  cautious in
answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor,
and
they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they  were descended  from folk who lived
in Ithilien  at  one time, before  it  was overrun. From  such  men the Lord
Denethor chose his forayers, who  crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where,
they would not say) to harry  the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between
the Ephel D®ath and the River.
`It  is close on  ten leagues hence to the east-shore of Anduin,'  said
Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this
journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! '
'Aye, curse the Southrons! ' said Damrod.  ` 'Tis  said that there were
dealings  of  old between Gondor  and the kingdoms of the  Harad in  the Far
South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away
south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest  of  their realms,
acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of  Men since
any passed to or  fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy
has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they
were
ever ready to His  will-as have so many also  in the East.  I doubt not that
the days of Gondor are numbered, and the  walls of Minas Tirith are  doomed,
so great is His strength and malice.'
`But still we will not sit idle  and  let Him do all as He would,' said
Mablung. `These cursed Southrons  come  now marching up the ancient roads
to
swell the hosts of  the Dark Tower.  Yea, up  the very roads  that  craft of
Gondor made.  And they go  ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the
power of their new  master is great enough, so that the mere shadow  of  His
hills  will  protect  them.  We  come  to teach  them  another lesson. Great
strength of them was  reported  to us  some days ago, marching north. One of
their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on
the road  above, where it passes through  the cloven way. The road may pass,
but  they  shall  not! Not  while Faramir  is Captain.  He  leads now in all
perilous  ventures.  But his life is charmed, or fate  spares him  for  some
other end.'
Their talk  died down into a listening silence.  All  seemed  still and
watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered  out. With his
