answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor,
and
they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they  were descended  from folk who lived
in Ithilien  at  one time, before  it  was overrun. From  such  men the Lord
Denethor chose his forayers, who  crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where,
they would not say) to harry  the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between
the Ephel D®ath and the River.
`It  is close on  ten leagues hence to the east-shore of Anduin,'  said
Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this
journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! '
'Aye, curse the Southrons! ' said Damrod.  ` 'Tis  said that there were
dealings  of  old between Gondor  and the kingdoms of the  Harad in  the Far
South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away
south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest  of  their realms,
acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of  Men since
any passed to or  fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy
has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they
were
ever ready to His  will-as have so many also  in the East.  I doubt not that
the days of Gondor are numbered, and the  walls of Minas Tirith are  doomed,
so great is His strength and malice.'
`But still we will not sit idle  and  let Him do all as He would,' said
Mablung. `These cursed Southrons  come  now marching up the ancient roads
to
swell the hosts of  the Dark Tower.  Yea, up  the very roads  that  craft of
Gondor made.  And they go  ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the
power of their new  master is great enough, so that the mere shadow  of  His
hills  will  protect  them.  We  come  to teach  them  another lesson. Great
strength of them was  reported  to us  some days ago, marching north. One of
their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on
the road  above, where it passes through  the cloven way. The road may pass,
but  they  shall  not! Not  while Faramir  is Captain.  He  leads now in all
perilous  ventures.  But his life is charmed, or fate  spares him  for  some
other end.'
Their talk  died down into a listening silence.  All  seemed  still and
watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered  out. With his
keen hobbit-eyes  he  saw that many  more Men were about. He  could see
them
stealing up the slopes, singly or in long files, keeping always to the shade
of  grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly visible  in their brown and  green
raiment, through  grass and  brake. All were  hooded  and  masked,  and  had
gauntlets on  their hands, and  were  armed like Faramir and his companions.
Before  long they had  all passed and  vanished. The sun rose till it neared
the South. The shadows shrank.
`I wonder where that dratted Gollum is?  '  thought Sam, as  he crawled
back into deeper shade. `He  stands  a fair chance of being spitted  for  an
Orc,  or of being roasted  by the Yellow Face. But I  fancy he'll look after
himself.' He lay down beside Frodo and began to doze.
He woke,  thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up.  It  was
now high noon.  The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees.
Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond  mistake from  above, over the
top  of  the slope. Sam thought that he heard cries and wild  shouting also,
but  the sound was faint,  as  if  it came out  of some  distant  cave. Then
presently the noise of  fighting broke  out  near at hand, just  above their
hiding-place. He could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel, the
clang  of sword on iron  cap, the  dull beat of blade on  shield;  men  were
!
yelling and screaming, and one clear loud voice was calling                  Gondor Gondor         !
`It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,' said Sam
to Frodo. 'They're as near as I want them now.'
But the noise grew closer. `They are  coming!' cried Damrod. `See! Some
of  the Southrons have broken  from the trap  and are flying  from the road.
There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain leading.'
Sam,  eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He scrambled a
little  way  up into one of  the  larger of the bay-trees. For  a  moment he
caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running  down the slope  some way off
with green-clad warriors leaping after them, hewing them down  as they fled.
Arrows  were thick in the air. Then suddenly straight over  the rim of their
sheltering bank, a man fell, crashing through  the slender trees,  nearly on
top of them. He came to  rest in the  fern a  few feet away,  face downward,
green arrow-feathers  sticking from  his neck  below  a  golden collar.  His
scarlet robes  were tattered, his  corslet of overlapping brazen  plates was
rent and hewn, his black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with
blood. His brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword.
It was Sam's  first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not
like it much. He was  glad that he could not see the dead  face. He wondered
what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of
heart, or what lies or threats had  led him on the long march from his home;
and if  he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash
of  thought which  was  quickly driven  from his mind. For  just as  Mablung
stepped towards the  fallen  body, there was a  new noise.  Great crying and
shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting.  And  then a
great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground.
'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod  to his  companion. 'May the Valar turn  him
aside! Mymak! Mymak!'
To his  astonishment and terror,  and lasting delight,  Sam  saw a vast
shape crash out of  the trees  and come careering down the  slope. Big as  a
house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving  hill.
Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the  Mymak of
Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now
in Middle-earth; his kin that  live still in latter days are but memories of
his girth and majesty. On  he came, straight towards  the watchers, and then
swerved  aside in the nick of time,  passing only  a few yards away, rocking
the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like
ears  spread out, long  snout upraised like a huge serpent  about to strike.
his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands
of  gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of  scarlet and  gold flapped
about him in wild tatters. The  ruins  of  what seemed a very war-tower  lay
upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage through the woods; and
high upon  his  neck still desperately clung a  tiny  figure-the  body  of a
mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings.
On the great  beast  thundered, blundering  in blind wrath through pool
and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about  the triple hide of
his flanks. Men of  both sides  fled before him,  but  many  he overtook and
crushed  to  the  ground. Soon he was lost  to  view, still  trumpeting  and
stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether he escaped
to
roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped
in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River
and was swallowed up.
Sam drew a  deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it  was!' he said. `So there are
