It was Sam's  first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not
like it much. He was  glad that he could not see the dead  face. He wondered
what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of
heart, or what lies or threats had  led him on the long march from his home;
and if  he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash
of  thought which  was  quickly driven  from his mind. For  just as  Mablung
stepped towards the  fallen  body, there was a  new noise.  Great crying and
shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting.  And  then a
great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground.
'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod  to his  companion. 'May the Valar turn  him
aside! Mymak! Mymak!'
To his  astonishment and terror,  and lasting delight,  Sam  saw a vast
shape crash out of  the trees  and come careering down the  slope. Big as  a
house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving  hill.
Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the  Mymak of
Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now
in Middle-earth; his kin that  live still in latter days are but memories of
his girth and majesty. On  he came, straight towards  the watchers, and then
swerved  aside in the nick of time,  passing only  a few yards away, rocking
the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like
ears  spread out, long  snout upraised like a huge serpent  about to strike.
his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands
of  gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of  scarlet and  gold flapped
about him in wild tatters. The  ruins  of  what seemed a very war-tower  lay
upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage through the woods; and
high upon  his  neck still desperately clung a  tiny  figure-the  body  of a
mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings.
On the great  beast  thundered, blundering  in blind wrath through pool
and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about  the triple hide of
his flanks. Men of  both sides  fled before him,  but  many  he overtook and
crushed  to  the  ground. Soon he was lost  to  view, still  trumpeting  and
stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether he escaped
to
roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped
in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River
and was swallowed up.
Sam drew a  deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it  was!' he said. `So there are
Oliphaunts, and I have seen one.  What a life! But no one  at home will ever
believe me. Well, if that's over, I'll have a bit of sleep.'
'Sleep while you  may,' said Mablung. `But  the Captain will return, if
he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued
as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.'
`Go quietly when you must!' said Sam.  `No need  to disturb my sleep. I
was walking all night.'
Mablung  laughed.  `I  do not  think  the Captain will leave you  here,
Master Samwise,' he said. 'But you shall see.'
Chapter 5. The Window on the West
It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke
to find that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come back. He had brought
many men  with him; indeed all the survivors of the foray  were now gathered
on the  slope nearby, two  or  three  hundred  strong.  They sat in  a  wide
semicircle,  between the  arms  of which Faramir was  seated  on the ground,
while  Frodo  stood  before him.  It looked strangely  like the  trial  of a
prisoner.
Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any  attention to him, and
he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he could see and hear
all that was  going on. He  watched and listened  intently, ready to dash to
his  master's  aid if needed. He  could see  Faramir's face,  which  was now
unmasked:  it  was  stern  and commanding, and  a keen  wit lay  behind  his
searching glance. Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo.
Sam soon became aware that  the Captain was not satisfied  with Frodo's
account of  himself at several  points:  what part  he  had  to  play in the
Company  that set out from Rivendell; why he had  left Boromir; and where he
was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur's Bane. Plainly he
saw that Frodo was concealing from him some matter of great importance.
'But  it  was at the coming of the Halfling  that Isildur's Bane should
waken,  or so  one must  read the words,' he  insisted. `If then you are the
Halfling that was  named,  doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may
be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny
it? '
Frodo made no answer. 'So! ' said Faramir. `I  wish then  to learn from
you more of it; for  what  concerns Boromir concerns  me. An orc-arrow  slew
Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty,  and the sight
of one would not be taken as a  sign of Doom by Boromir of  Gondor.  Had you
this thing  in keeping?  It is hidden, you say;  but is not that because you
choose to hide it? '
'No, not because I choose,' answered Frodo. `It  does not belong to me.
It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any  could claim
it, it would  be Aragorn son  of Arathorn, whom  I named, the  leader of our
Company from Moria to Rauros.'
