Chapter 5. The Window on the West
It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke
to find that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come back. He had brought
many men  with him; indeed all the survivors of the foray  were now gathered
on the  slope nearby, two  or  three  hundred  strong.  They sat in  a  wide
semicircle,  between the  arms  of which Faramir was  seated  on the ground,
while  Frodo  stood  before him.  It looked strangely  like the  trial  of a
prisoner.
Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any  attention to him, and
he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he could see and hear
all that was  going on. He  watched and listened  intently, ready to dash to
his  master's  aid if needed. He  could see  Faramir's face,  which  was now
unmasked:  it  was  stern  and commanding, and  a keen  wit lay  behind  his
searching glance. Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo.
Sam soon became aware that  the Captain was not satisfied  with Frodo's
account of  himself at several  points:  what part  he  had  to  play in the
Company  that set out from Rivendell; why he had  left Boromir; and where he
was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur's Bane. Plainly he
saw that Frodo was concealing from him some matter of great importance.
'But  it  was at the coming of the Halfling  that Isildur's Bane should
waken,  or so  one must  read the words,' he  insisted. `If then you are the
Halfling that was  named,  doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may
be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny
it? '
Frodo made no answer. 'So! ' said Faramir. `I  wish then  to learn from
you more of it; for  what  concerns Boromir concerns  me. An orc-arrow  slew
Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty,  and the sight
of one would not be taken as a  sign of Doom by Boromir of  Gondor.  Had you
this thing  in keeping?  It is hidden, you say;  but is not that because you
choose to hide it? '
'No, not because I choose,' answered Frodo. `It  does not belong to me.
It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any  could claim
it, it would  be Aragorn son  of Arathorn, whom  I named, the  leader of our
Company from Moria to Rauros.'
'Why so, and not  Boromir, prince of the City that the  sons of Elendil
founded? '
'Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from
Isildur  Elendil's son  himself. And the sword  that he  bears was Elendil's
sword.'
A  murmur of  astonishment ran through all the ring  of men. Some cried
aloud: 'The sword of Elendil! The  sword  of Elendil comes  to Minas Tirith!
Great tidings! ' But Faramir's face was unmoved.
`Maybe,' he said. `But so great a claim will need to be established and
clear proofs  will  be  required,  should this  Aragorn ever  come  to Minas
Tirith. He  had not come,  nor any of your  Company, when I set out six days
ago.'
'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,' said Frodo. `Indeed, if  Boromir
were here, he would answer all your  questions. And since  he was already at
Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you
return, you may  soon learn the  answers  there. My part in the  Company was
known to him, as  to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of
Imladris  himself before the  whole Council. On that errand I came into this
country, but it is not mine to reveal to any  outside the Company. Yet those
who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.'
Frodo's tone was  proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of it;  but
it did not appease Faramir.
`So!' he said. `You bid me mind my own  affairs,  and get me back home,
and let  you be.  Boromir  will tell all, when he comes. When he comes,  say
you! Were you a friend of Boromir?'
Vividly before Frodo's  mind came the memory  of Boromir's assault upon
him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir's eyes watching him grew harder.
'Boromir was a valiant member of our Company ' said Frodo at length. 'Yes, I
was his friend, for my part.'
Faramir smiled grimly. `Then you would grieve to learn that  Boromir is
dead? '
'I  would  grieve  indeed,'  said  Frodo.  Then catching  the  look  in
Faramir's eyes, he faltered. 'Dead?'  he said. `Do you mean that he is dead,
and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words, playing with
me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?'
`I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,' said Faramir.
`How then did  he die, and how do  you know of  it? Since  you say that
none of the Company had reached the city when you left.'
'As to the  manner  of  his death, I  had  hoped that  his  friend  and
companion would tell me how it was.'
`But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still for all
that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.'
`Many indeed,' said Faramir, `and treachery not the least.'
Sam  had  been  getting more  and  more  impatient  and  angry at  this
conversation. These last words were  more  than he  could bear, and bursting
into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master's side.
'Begging  your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he  said, `but this has gone on long
enough. He's no right to talk to you so.  After all you've gone  through, as
much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone else.
'See here,  Captain! ' He  planted himself squarely in front of Faramir
his  hands  on his hips,  and a look on his  face as  if he was addressing a
young  hobbit who  had offered him what  he  called `sauce'  when questioned
about  visits to the orchard. There was some  murmuring, but also some grins
on the faces  of the men looking on: the  sight of  their Captain sitting on
the ground  and  eye to eye with  a young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling
with wrath, was one beyond their experience. `See here! ' he said. `What are
you driving at? Let's come to  the point before all the Orcs of  Mordor come
down on us! If  you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away,
you've got no sense; but say it, and have done!  And then  let us  know what
you mean to do  about it. But it's a pity that folk as talk  about  fighting
the  Enemy  can't  let  others  do  their  bit  in  their  own  way  without
interfering. He'd be mighty pleased, if he could see you now. Think he'd got
a new friend, he would.'
`Patience!' said Faramir, but without anger.  `Do not speak before your
master, whose wit is  greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach  me
of our peril. Even  so, I  spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a
hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago.  For I
am commanded  to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of  the
Lord of Gondor.  But I do not slay man  or beast needlessly, and  not gladly
even when it is needed. Neither do  I talk  in vain. So be comforted. Sit by
your master, and be silent! '
Sam  sat down heavily with a red face.  Faramir turned to Frodo  again:
'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of  death
have many wings.         Night oft brings news to  near kindred           , 'tis said. Boromir
