none of the Company had reached the city when you left.'
'As to the  manner  of  his death, I  had  hoped that  his  friend  and
companion would tell me how it was.'
`But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still for all
that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.'
`Many indeed,' said Faramir, `and treachery not the least.'
Sam  had  been  getting more  and  more  impatient  and  angry at  this
conversation. These last words were  more  than he  could bear, and bursting
into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master's side.
'Begging  your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he  said, `but this has gone on long
enough. He's no right to talk to you so.  After all you've gone  through, as
much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone else.
'See here,  Captain! ' He  planted himself squarely in front of Faramir
his  hands  on his hips,  and a look on his  face as  if he was addressing a
young  hobbit who  had offered him what  he  called `sauce'  when questioned
about  visits to the orchard. There was some  murmuring, but also some grins
on the faces  of the men looking on: the  sight of  their Captain sitting on
the ground  and  eye to eye with  a young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling
with wrath, was one beyond their experience. `See here! ' he said. `What are
you driving at? Let's come to  the point before all the Orcs of  Mordor come
down on us! If  you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away,
you've got no sense; but say it, and have done!  And then  let us  know what
you mean to do  about it. But it's a pity that folk as talk  about  fighting
the  Enemy  can't  let  others  do  their  bit  in  their  own  way  without
interfering. He'd be mighty pleased, if he could see you now. Think he'd got
a new friend, he would.'
`Patience!' said Faramir, but without anger.  `Do not speak before your
master, whose wit is  greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach  me
of our peril. Even  so, I  spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a
hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago.  For I
am commanded  to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of  the
Lord of Gondor.  But I do not slay man  or beast needlessly, and  not gladly
even when it is needed. Neither do  I talk  in vain. So be comforted. Sit by
your master, and be silent! '
Sam  sat down heavily with a red face.  Faramir turned to Frodo  again:
'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of  death
have many wings.         Night oft brings news to  near kindred           , 'tis said. Boromir
was my brother.'
A  shadow  of sorrow passed  over his face.  `Do you remember  aught of
special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his gear?'
Frodo  thought for a moment,  fearing some further trap, and  wondering
how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly saved the Ring from the
proud grasp of Boromir, and how he would fare now among so many men,
warlike
and  strong, he did not know.  Yet he felt in his heart that Faramir, though
he was much like his brother  in  looks, was a man less self-regarding, both
sterner and wiser. 'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,' he said at last.
`You remember  well, and  as  one  who has  in  truth  seen  him,' said
Faramir. `Then maybe you can see it in your mind's eye: a great horn  of the
wild ox of the East, bound with silver, and written with ancient characters.
That horn the eldest son of our house has borne for many generations; and it
is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor, as
the realm was of old, its voice will not pass unheeded.
'Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about this
hour of  the  day, I heard  the blowing of that horn: from the northward  it
seemed, but  dim, as if  it were but an echo in the mind. A boding of ill we
thought it, my father and I, for no tidings had we heard of Boromir since he
went away, and no watcher on our borders had seen him pass. And on the third
night after another and a stranger thing befell me.
'I sat at night by  the waters of Anduin,  in the grey dark  under  the
young pale moon, watching the ever-moving  stream;  and the  sad  reeds were
rustling. So do we  ever watch the shores  nigh Osgiliath, which our enemies
now partly hold,  and issue from it to harry our lands. But  that night  all
the world slept at the midnight hour. Then I saw, or it seemed that I saw, a
boat floating  on  the water, glimmering  grey,  a small  boat  of a strange
fashion with a high prow. and there was none to row or steer it.
`An awe fell on me, for  a pale light was round it. But I rose and went
to the bank, and began to walk out into the stream,  for I was drawn towards
it. Then the boat turned towards me, and stayed its pace, and floated slowly
by  within my hand's reach, yet I durst not handle it. It waded  deep, as if
it were heavily burdened,  and it  seemed to me  as it passed under  my gaze
that it was  almost filled with clear water, from which came the light;  and
lapped in the water a warrior lay asleep.
`A broken  sword  was on his knee. I saw  many wounds on  him.  It  was
Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his beloved face. One
thing only I missed: his horn. One thing only I knew not: a fair belt, as it
were  of linked golden leaves, about his waist.             Boromir!      I cried .  Where is
thy  horn? Whither  goest  thou? O Boromir!               But he was gone. The boat turned
into the stream and passed  glimmering on into the night. Dreamlike  it was.
and yet no dream, for there  was  no waking. And I do  not  doubt that he is
dead and has passed down the River to the Sea.'
'Alas!' said  Frodo. 'That was indeed Boromir as I  knew  him. For  the
golden belt was given to him in Lothlurien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was
that clothed us as  you see  us, in elven-grey. This  brooch is of  the same
workmanship.' He touched the green and silver leaf that  fastened  his cloak
beneath his throat.
Faramir looked  closely at it.  `It is beautiful,' he  said. 'Yes, 'tis
work of  the same  craft. So  then  you passed through the Land  of  Lurien?
Laurelindurenan  it  was named of  old, but long now it  has lain beyond the
knowledge of Men,' he added softly, regarding Frodo with a new wonder in his
eyes. `Much  that was strange about you  I begin now to understand. Will you
not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight
of the land of his home.'
'No more can I say than I have said,' answered Frodo. `Though your tale
fills me with foreboding. A  vision it was that  you saw, I  think,  and  no
more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it
is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have  seen the faces of fair warriors of
old laid in  sleep beneath the  pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so  by
his foul arts.'
'Nay, it was not so,' said Faramir. 'For his works  fill the heart with
loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.'
`Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? ' asked Frodo. 'For
no boat could have been carried  over the stony hills from  Tol Brandir; and
Boromir purposed to  go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan.
And
yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in
the boiling pools, though laden with water? '
'I know not,' said Faramir. 'But whence came the boat? '
`From Lurien,' said Frodo. 'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to
the Falls. They also were of elven-work.'
'You passed through the Hidden Land,' said  Faramir, `but it seems that
