Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his beloved face. One
thing only I missed: his horn. One thing only I knew not: a fair belt, as it
were  of linked golden leaves, about his waist.             Boromir!      I cried .  Where is
thy  horn? Whither  goest  thou? O Boromir!               But he was gone. The boat turned
into the stream and passed  glimmering on into the night. Dreamlike  it was.
and yet no dream, for there  was  no waking. And I do  not  doubt that he is
dead and has passed down the River to the Sea.'
'Alas!' said  Frodo. 'That was indeed Boromir as I  knew  him. For  the
golden belt was given to him in Lothlurien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was
that clothed us as  you see  us, in elven-grey. This  brooch is of  the same
workmanship.' He touched the green and silver leaf that  fastened  his cloak
beneath his throat.
Faramir looked  closely at it.  `It is beautiful,' he  said. 'Yes, 'tis
work of  the same  craft. So  then  you passed through the Land  of  Lurien?
Laurelindurenan  it  was named of  old, but long now it  has lain beyond the
knowledge of Men,' he added softly, regarding Frodo with a new wonder in his
eyes. `Much  that was strange about you  I begin now to understand. Will you
not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight
of the land of his home.'
'No more can I say than I have said,' answered Frodo. `Though your tale
fills me with foreboding. A  vision it was that  you saw, I  think,  and  no
more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it
is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have  seen the faces of fair warriors of
old laid in  sleep beneath the  pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so  by
his foul arts.'
'Nay, it was not so,' said Faramir. 'For his works  fill the heart with
loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.'
`Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? ' asked Frodo. 'For
no boat could have been carried  over the stony hills from  Tol Brandir; and
Boromir purposed to  go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan.
And
yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in
the boiling pools, though laden with water? '
'I know not,' said Faramir. 'But whence came the boat? '
`From Lurien,' said Frodo. 'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to
the Falls. They also were of elven-work.'
'You passed through the Hidden Land,' said  Faramir, `but it seems that
you little  understood its power. If  Men have dealings with the Mistress of
Magic who dwells in the Golden  Wood, then they may look for  strange things
to follow. For it  is perilous  for mortal man  to walk  out of the world of
this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, 'tis said.
` Boromir, O Boromir!       ' he cried. ` What did she say to you, the Lady that
dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you  ever
to Laurelindurenan, and came not by your own road,  upon the horses of
Rohan
riding home in the morning?          '
Then turning again to  Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice  once more. 'To
those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo.
But  not  here  or now.  maybe. But lest you  still should  think my  tale a
vision, I  will tell  you this.  The horn of Boromir at  least  returned  in
truth, and not in seeming. The horn came,  but it was  cloven  in two, as it
were  by axe or  sword. The shards  came severally to  shore: one was  found
among the reeds where watchers of  Gondor lay,  northwards below the infalls
of the Entwash;  the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an
errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, 'tis said.
'And now the horn of the elder  son lies in two pieces upon the lap  of
Denethor,  sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And you  can tell me
nothing of the cleaving of the horn? '
'No, I did not know of it,' said Frodo. `But the day when you  heard it
blowing, if your reckoning is true, was  the day when we parted, when  I and
my servant left the Company.  And now your  tale fills me with dread. For if
Boromir was then in peril and was slain, I  must fear that all my companions
perished too. And they were my kindred and my friends.
`Will you not put aside your doubt of me and let me go? I am weary, and
full of grief, and  afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to attempt, before I
too am slain. And the more need of haste, if  we two halflings are  all that
remain of our fellowship.
'Go back, Faramir,  valiant Captain of  Gondor,  and  defend  your city
while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.'
`For me there is no comfort in our speech together,' said Faramir; `but
you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless the people of Lurien
themselves came  to him,  who arrayed Boromir  as for a funeral? Not Orcs or
servants of the Nameless. Some of your Company, I guess, live still.
`But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer.
If  hard days  have made  me  any judge of Men's words and faces, then I may
make a guess at Halflings! Though,' and  now he  smiled, `there is something
strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words
together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith
to answer  there to Denethor, and my  life will justly be forfeit, if  I now
choose a course that  proves ill for my city. So I will not  decide in haste
what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.'
He  sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men who were
gathered round  him broke up into small  groups, and went off  this way  and
that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the  rocks and  trees. Soon only
Mablung and Damrod remained.
'Now you,  Frodo  and Samwise, will come  with me  and my guards,' said
Faramir. `You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose.
It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after  this
affray than it has been yet. And  you cannot,  I  think, go far today in any
case, for you are weary. And so are we.  We are going  now to a secret place
we  have, somewhat less than ten  miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the
Enemy have not found  it yet, and if they did, we  could  hold  it long even
against many. There we may lie up and rest for  a while, and you with us. In
the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.'
There was nothing for Frodo to do but to  fall in with this request, or
order. It seemed in any case a wise course for the moment, since this  foray
of the men  of  Gondor had made a  journey  in Ithilien more  dangerous than
ever.
They set out  at once: Mablung and  Damrod  a little ahead, and Faramir
with Frodo  and Sam  behind.  Skirting the hither side of the pool where the
hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed a long bank, and passed
into  green-shadowed woodlands that marched  ever downwards  and
westwards.
While they walked, as swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed
voices.
'I broke off our speech together,' said Faramir, 'not only because time
pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because we were
drawing
near to matters that were better not debated openly  before many men. It was
for that  reason that I turned rather to the matter of my brother and let be
Isildur's Bane    . You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.'
