If  hard days  have made  me  any judge of Men's words and faces, then I may
make a guess at Halflings! Though,' and  now he  smiled, `there is something
strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words
together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith
to answer  there to Denethor, and my  life will justly be forfeit, if  I now
choose a course that  proves ill for my city. So I will not  decide in haste
what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.'
He  sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men who were
gathered round  him broke up into small  groups, and went off  this way  and
that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the  rocks and  trees. Soon only
Mablung and Damrod remained.
'Now you,  Frodo  and Samwise, will come  with me  and my guards,' said
Faramir. `You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose.
It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after  this
affray than it has been yet. And  you cannot,  I  think, go far today in any
case, for you are weary. And so are we.  We are going  now to a secret place
we  have, somewhat less than ten  miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the
Enemy have not found  it yet, and if they did, we  could  hold  it long even
against many. There we may lie up and rest for  a while, and you with us. In
the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.'
There was nothing for Frodo to do but to  fall in with this request, or
order. It seemed in any case a wise course for the moment, since this  foray
of the men  of  Gondor had made a  journey  in Ithilien more  dangerous than
ever.
They set out  at once: Mablung and  Damrod  a little ahead, and Faramir
with Frodo  and Sam  behind.  Skirting the hither side of the pool where the
hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed a long bank, and passed
into  green-shadowed woodlands that marched  ever downwards  and
westwards.
While they walked, as swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed
voices.
'I broke off our speech together,' said Faramir, 'not only because time
pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because we were
drawing
near to matters that were better not debated openly  before many men. It was
for that  reason that I turned rather to the matter of my brother and let be
Isildur's Bane    . You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.'
`I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,' said Frodo.
`I do  not blame you,'  said Faramir. 'You spoke  with skill  in a hard
place, and wisely,  it seemed to me. But I learned or  guessed more from you
than your words said. You  were  not friendly with Boromir, or  you  did not
part  in  friendship.  You, and  Master  Samwise,  too,  I  guess have  some
grievance. Now I  loved him dearly, and would gladly avenge his death, yet I
knew  him well.      Isildur's  Bane      -- I would hazard that       Isildur's Bane      lay
between you and was a cause of contention in  your Company. Clearly it is  a
mighty  heirloom  of some sort,  and such  things do not  breed  peace among
confederates, not if aught may be  learned from  ancient tales. Do I not hit
near the mark?'
`Near,' said Frodo,  'but  not in the gold.  There was no contention in
our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from
the
Emyn  Muil. But be that as it may, ancient  tales teach us also the peril of
rash words concerning such things as -- heirlooms.'
'Ah,  then it is as I  thought: your trouble was with Boromir alone. He
wished this  thing  brought to Minas Tirith. Alas! it is a crooked fate that
seals  your lips who saw him  last, and holds from me that  which I  long to
know: what  was  in his  heart and  thought  in his latest hours. Whether he
erred or no, of this I am sure: he died well, achieving some good thing. His
face was more beautiful even than in life.
`But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about           Isildur's  Bane    . Forgive
me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought.
We had had a hard fight, and there was more than enough to fill my mind. But
even as  I spoke  with you, I drew  nearer to the mark, and so  deliberately
shot wider.  For you must know that much is still preserved  of ancient lore
among the Rulers of the city  that is not spread abroad. We of  my house are
not  of the line  of  Elendil.  though the blood of N®menor is in us. For we
reckon back our line  to  Mardil,  the good steward, who ruled in the king's
stead when he went away to war. And  that was King Edrnur, last  of the line
of Anbrion, and  childless, and  he  came never back. And the stewards  have
governed the city since that day, though it was many generations of Men ago.
'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy,  when we together learned the
tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him
that his father was not king. "How many hundreds of years needs it to make a
steward a king, if the king  returns not? " he asked. "Few years, maybe,  in
other places of less  royalty," my father  answered. "In Gondor ten thousand
years  would not  suffice."  Alas!  poor Boromir. Does  that  not  tell  you
something of him? '
'It does,' said Frodo. `Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.'
'I doubt it  not,' said  Faramir. `If he  were satisfied  of  Aragorn's
claim  as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch has not yet
come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in her wars.
`But I  stray. We in  the house of Denethor  know much  ancient lore by
long  tradition,  and  there  are  moreover in  our  treasuries many  things
preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments, yea, and on stone,
and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers characters. Some none can now
read; and for the rest,  few ever unlock them. I can  read a little in them,
for I have had teaching. It was these  records that brought the Grey Pilgrim
to  us. I first saw him when I was a child,  and he has been twice or thrice
since then.'
'The Grey Pilgrim? ' said Frodo. 'Had he a name?'
'Mithrandir we  called  him in  elf-fashion,' said Faramir, 'and he was
content.   Many are my names in many countries               ,  he said.  Mithrandir among the
Elves, Tharkyn to the  Dwarves; Olurin I was in my youth in the West that is
forgotten, in  the  South Incbnus, in  the North Gandalf;  to the East  I go
not. '
'Gandalf!' said Frodo. 'I thought it was he.  Gandalf  the Grey dearest
of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.'
'Mithrandir  was  lost!  '  said Faramir.  'An  evil fate seems to have
pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one  of so  great
wisdom, and of  power -- for many wonderful things he  did among us -- could
perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of  this, and
that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? '
'Alas! yes,' said Frodo. `I saw him fall into the abyss.'
'I see that there  is some great tale of dread in  this.' said  Faramir
`which perhaps  you may  tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I
now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done
in our  time. Had he been  among us to  consult concerning the hard words of
our  dream, he could have  made them clear to  us without need of messenger.
Yet, maybe,  he would  not  have done  so,  and  the journey of Boromir  was
doomed.  Mithrandir never spoke to us  of what was to  be, nor did he reveal
his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I  do  not  know, to look at the
