other places of less  royalty," my father  answered. "In Gondor ten thousand
years  would not  suffice."  Alas!  poor Boromir. Does  that  not  tell  you
something of him? '
'It does,' said Frodo. `Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.'
'I doubt it  not,' said  Faramir. `If he  were satisfied  of  Aragorn's
claim  as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch has not yet
come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in her wars.
`But I  stray. We in  the house of Denethor  know much  ancient lore by
long  tradition,  and  there  are  moreover in  our  treasuries many  things
preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments, yea, and on stone,
and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers characters. Some none can now
read; and for the rest,  few ever unlock them. I can  read a little in them,
for I have had teaching. It was these  records that brought the Grey Pilgrim
to  us. I first saw him when I was a child,  and he has been twice or thrice
since then.'
'The Grey Pilgrim? ' said Frodo. 'Had he a name?'
'Mithrandir we  called  him in  elf-fashion,' said Faramir, 'and he was
content.   Many are my names in many countries               ,  he said.  Mithrandir among the
Elves, Tharkyn to the  Dwarves; Olurin I was in my youth in the West that is
forgotten, in  the  South Incbnus, in  the North Gandalf;  to the East  I go
not. '
'Gandalf!' said Frodo. 'I thought it was he.  Gandalf  the Grey dearest
of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.'
'Mithrandir  was  lost!  '  said Faramir.  'An  evil fate seems to have
pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one  of so  great
wisdom, and of  power -- for many wonderful things he  did among us -- could
perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of  this, and
that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? '
'Alas! yes,' said Frodo. `I saw him fall into the abyss.'
'I see that there  is some great tale of dread in  this.' said  Faramir
`which perhaps  you may  tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I
now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done
in our  time. Had he been  among us to  consult concerning the hard words of
our  dream, he could have  made them clear to  us without need of messenger.
Yet, maybe,  he would  not  have done  so,  and  the journey of Boromir  was
doomed.  Mithrandir never spoke to us  of what was to  be, nor did he reveal
his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I  do  not  know, to look at the
secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would  teach
(and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would  question us above all
else  concerning  the  Great  Battle  that was fought  upon Dagorlad  in the
beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was overthrown.  And
he was
eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing
certain was ever known among us of his end.'
Now Faramir's voice  sank  to  a whisper. 'But  this much  I learned or
guessed, and I have kept it ever secret in my heart since: that Isildur took
somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he  went away  from Gondor,
never
to be  seen among  mortal  men  again. Here  I  thought  was  the answer  to
Mithrandir's questioning. But  it seemed then a  matter that concerned  only
the seekers after ancient learning. Nor when the riddling words of our dream
were  debated  among us,  did I think of            Isildur's  Bane     as being  this same
thing. For Isildur was ambushed and  slain by  orc-arrows, according  to the
only legend that we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more.
`What in truth  this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom  of
power and peril it must be.  A  fell weapon, perchance, devised by  the Dark
Lord. If it were  a thing that gave advantage in battle. I can  well believe
that  Boromir,  the  proud  and fearless,  often rash, ever anxious for  the
victory of  Minas  Tirith (and  his own glory therein), might desire  such a
thing and be allured by  it. Alas that ever he went on that errand! I should
have been chosen by my  father and the elders but he put himself forward. as
being the older and the hardier (both true), and he would not be stayed.
'But  fear no more!  I would not take  this  thing,  if it  lay by  the
highway. Not were Minas Tirith  falling in ruin and  I alone could save her,
so, using the  weapon of the Dark Lord for her  good and my glory.  No. I do
not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.'
'Neither did the Council,' said Frodo. 'Nor do  I. I would have nothing
to do with such matters.'
`For myself,' said Faramir, 'I would see the White Tree in flower again
in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in
peace:  Minas  Anor again as of old, full of light, high and fair, beautiful
as a queen among other queens: not a mistress of many  slaves, nay, not even
a kind mistress of willing slaves.  War  must  be, while we defend our lives
against a destroyer who would devour all; but I do not love the bright sword
for its sharpness, nor the arrow for  its swiftness, nor the warrior for his
glory. I love only that which they defend: the city of the Men  of  N®menor;
and I would have  her loved for her memory,  her ancientry, her  beauty, and
her present wisdom. Not feared, save  as men may fear the  dignity of a man,
old and wise.
'So  fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me  more.  I do not even ask
you to tell me  whether I now speak nearer the  mark. But if you  will trust
me,  it may  be that I can advise  you in your present  quest, whatever that
be-yes, and even aid you.'
Frodo made no  answer. Almost he  yielded to  the  desire for  help and
counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words  seemed so wise and fair,
all that was in his mind. But something  held him back. His heart  was heavy
with fear and sorrow: if he and Sam  were indeed, as seemed likely, all that
was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he was  in sole command of the secret
of their errand. Better mistrust undeserved  than rash words. And the memory
of Boromir, of the dreadful change that the  lure of the Ring had  worked in
him, was very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to
his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin.
They walked on in  silence for a  while,  passing  like grey and  green
shadows under  the old trees,  their feet  making no  sound; above them many
birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the
evergreen woods of Ithilien.
Sam had taken no part in  the conversation, though he had listened; and
at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to  all  the soft
woodland noises about them. One thing he had noted, that in all the talk the
name of Gollum had not once come up. He was glad, though he felt that it was
too much to hope that he would never  hear  it again. He soon  became  aware
also that though they  walked alone, there  were many men close at hand: not
only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others
on either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place.
Once,  looking suddenly back,  as if some prickle of the skin told  him
that he  was watched from behind, he  thought he caught a brief glimpse of a
small dark shape slipping behind a  tree-trunk. He opened his mouth to speak
and shut it again. `I'm not sure of it,' he said to himself, 'and why should
I remind them of the old villain, if  they choose to  forget  him? I wish  I
could!'
So they passed on,  until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began
