doubt that you will find  what you seek, or accomplish what  you intend,  or
that you will ever return. Is not that so?'
'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to
Gandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring
gently.
'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor.
'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?'
'I  do not know  for what  reason the Enemy is pursuing you,'  answered
Gildor; 'but I perceive that he is - strange indeed though that seems to me.
And I warn  you  that peril is now both before you  and behind you, and upon
either side.'
'You  mean the Riders? I feared  that  they were servants of the Enemy.
What    are  the Black Riders?'
'Has Gandalf told you nothing?'
'Nothing about such creatures.'
'Then I think it  is not  for me to say more  - lest terror should keep
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only just in
time, if  indeed you are in time. You must now make  haste, and neither stay
nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.'
'I cannot  imagine what information could be more terrifying  than your
hints  and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew  that  danger lay  ahead,  of
course; but I did not expect to  meet it in  our  own Shire.  Can't a hobbit
walk from the Water to the River in peace?'
'But  it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here before
hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The
wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for
ever fence it out.'
'I know - and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What can I
do  now?  My  plan was  to  leave  the Shire  secretly, and  make my  way to
Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.'
'I  think you should still follow that  plan,'  said Gildor.  'I do not
think the Road  will prove too  hard for  your courage. But  if  you  desire
clearer counsel, you should ask  Gandalf. I do not know the reason  for your
flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your  pursuers will assail
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you  will see him before
you leave the Shire?'
'I hope so. But that is another  thing that  makes  me anxious. I  have
been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at
the
latest two  nights  ago; but he has  never appeared. Now I am wondering what
can have happened. Should I wait for him?'
Gildor  was silent for a moment. 'I do not like this news,' he said  at
last.  'That Gandalf should be late, does not  bode well. But it is said:                Do
not meddle  in  the  affairs  of Wizards, for they  are subtle  and quick to
anger.   The choice is yours: to go or wait.'
'And  it  is also  said,'  answered  Frodo:  'Go         not  to the  Elves for
counsel, for they will say both no and yes.'
'Is it  indeed?' laughed Gildor. 'Elves  seldom give  unguarded advice,
for advice is a  dangerous gift,  even from  the  wise to the wise, and  all
courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning
yourself; and how then shall  I choose better  than you? But if  you  demand
advice, I will for friendship's sake give it.  I think you  should now go at
once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I
also advise  this:  do not  go  alone. Take such friends  as are trusty  and
willing. Now you should be grateful, for I do  not give this counsel gladly.
The Elves have their  own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little
concerned  with the ways of  hobbits,  or of any other creatures upon earth.
Our  paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting  there
may be more than chance; but the purpose  is not clear to  me, and I fear to
say too much.'
'I am  deeply grateful,' said  Frodo;  'but  I  wish you would  tell me
plainly what the  Black  Riders  are. If I  take your  advice I may not  see
Gandalf for  a  long while,  and I ought to know what  is  the  danger  that
pursues me.'
'Is  it not  enough to  know  that they  are servants  of  the  Enemy?'
answered Gildor. 'Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no
more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you,  Frodo son of
Drogo, will  know more  of  these  fell things than  Gildor  Inglorion.  May
Elbereth protect you!'
'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I  chiefly
need.'
'Courage is found in unlikely places,' said  Gildor. 'Be  of good hope!
Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will send our  messages
through  the lands.  The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey,
and
those that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend;
and  may the stars shine upon the end  of your road! Seldom have we had such
delight in strangers,  and it  is  fair to hear words  of the Ancient Speech
from the lips of other wanderers in the world.'
Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor  finished speaking. 'I
will sleep now,' he said; and the  Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and
he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber.
