for its sharpness, nor the arrow for  its swiftness, nor the warrior for his
glory. I love only that which they defend: the city of the Men  of  N®menor;
and I would have  her loved for her memory,  her ancientry, her  beauty, and
her present wisdom. Not feared, save  as men may fear the  dignity of a man,
old and wise.
'So  fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me  more.  I do not even ask
you to tell me  whether I now speak nearer the  mark. But if you  will trust
me,  it may  be that I can advise  you in your present  quest, whatever that
be-yes, and even aid you.'
Frodo made no  answer. Almost he  yielded to  the  desire for  help and
counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words  seemed so wise and fair,
all that was in his mind. But something  held him back. His heart  was heavy
with fear and sorrow: if he and Sam  were indeed, as seemed likely, all that
was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he was  in sole command of the secret
of their errand. Better mistrust undeserved  than rash words. And the memory
of Boromir, of the dreadful change that the  lure of the Ring had  worked in
him, was very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to
his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin.
They walked on in  silence for a  while,  passing  like grey and  green
shadows under  the old trees,  their feet  making no  sound; above them many
birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the
evergreen woods of Ithilien.
Sam had taken no part in  the conversation, though he had listened; and
at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to  all  the soft
woodland noises about them. One thing he had noted, that in all the talk the
name of Gollum had not once come up. He was glad, though he felt that it was
too much to hope that he would never  hear  it again. He soon  became  aware
also that though they  walked alone, there  were many men close at hand: not
only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others
on either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place.
Once,  looking suddenly back,  as if some prickle of the skin told  him
that he  was watched from behind, he  thought he caught a brief glimpse of a
small dark shape slipping behind a  tree-trunk. He opened his mouth to speak
and shut it again. `I'm not sure of it,' he said to himself, 'and why should
I remind them of the old villain, if  they choose to  forget  him? I wish  I
could!'
So they passed on,  until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began
to fall more steeply.  Then they turned aside again, to the right,  and came
quickly  to a  small river in a narrow  gorge:  it was the  same stream that
trickled  far  above out of  the round pool, now grown  to  a swift torrent,
leaping down over many stones in a deep-cloven bed,  overhung  with ilex and
dark box-woods. Looking west they could see,  below them in a haze of light,
lowlands and broad meads, and glinting far off in the westering sun the wide
waters of the Anduin.
'Here, alas! I must do you  a discourtesy,' said  Faramir.  "I hope you
will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as
not  to  slay you or to bind  you. But it is a command that no stranger, not
even one of Rohan that fights  with  us, shall  see the path we now  go with
open eyes. I must blindfold you.'
`As you will,' said  Frodo. 'Even the Elves  do  likewise  at need, and
blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlurien. Gimli  the dwarf took
it ill, but the hobbits endured it.'
`It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,' said Faramir. 'But I
am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.'
He called softly  and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the
trees  and  came  back  to  him.  'Blindfold  these guests,'  said  Faramir.
`Securely, but not so as to discomfort  them. Do not  tie  their hands. They
will  give their word not to try and see.  I  could trust them to shut their
eyes of their  own accord, but  eyes will blink, if  the  feet stumble. Lead
them so that they do not falter.'
With green scarves the  two guards  now bound up the hobbits'  eyes and
drew their hoods down almost  to their mouths; then  quickly  they took each
one by  the hand and went on their way. All that Frodo and Sam knew of  this
last mile of the road they learned from guessing in the dark. After a little
they found that  they were  on a  path descending  steeply; soon  it grew so
narrow that they went in  single file, brushing a stony wall on either side;
their  guards steered them  from  behind with  hands  laid  firmly on  their
shoulders. Now and again they came  to  rough  places  and were  lifted from
their feet for a  while,  and then  set down again. Always  the noise of the
running water  was  on their right hand, and it grew  nearer and louder.  At
length  they  were  halted.  Quickly Mablung and  Damrod turned them  about,
several times, and they lost all sense of direction. They climbed  upwards a
little: it seemed cold and the noise  of the stream had become  faint.  Then
they were picked up  and carried down, down many steps, and round a  corner.
Suddenly they heard  the water again, loud now,  rushing and  splashing. All
round them it seemed, and  they felt a fine rain  on their hands and cheeks.
At last they were set on their  feet once  more. For a moment they stood so,
half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke.
Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. `Let  them see! ' he said.
The scarves  were  removed and  their hoods drawn back, and they blinked and
gasped.
They stood on a wet floor of polished  stone, the doorstep, as it were,
of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But  in  front a thin
veil  of water was hung, so  near that Frodo could  have put an outstretched
arm into it. It  faced westward. The level shafts  of the setting sun behind
beat  upon it, and the red  light was broken  into many flickering  beams of
ever-changing  colour. It  was as if  they  stood  at  the  window  of  some
elven-tower, curtained with threaded  jewels  of silver and  gold, and ruby,
sapphire and amethyst, all kindled with an unconsuming fire.
'At least by good chance we  came at the  right hour  to reward you for
your patience,' said Faramir.  `This is the  Window  of the Sunset,  Henneth
Annyn,  fairest  of all the falls of Ithilien, land  of  many fountains. Few
strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it.
Enter now and see! '
Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the fire faded in the flowing water.
They  turned and passed under  the low forbidding  arch. At  once they found
themselves in a rock-chamber, wide and rough, with an  uneven stooping roof.
A  few torches were kindled  and cast a dim  light on the  glistening walls.
Many men were already there. Others were  still coming in by twos and threes
through a dark narrow door on one side. As their eyes grew accustomed to the
gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was
filled with great store of arms and victuals.
'Well, here is  our refuge,'  said Faramir. `Not a place of  great ease
but here you may pass  the night in peace. It is dry at least,  and there is
food, though no fire. At one  time the water flowed  down  through this cave
and out  of the  arch, but its  course was changed further  up the gorge, by
workmen  of old, and the stream sent down in a fall  of  doubled height over
the rocks  far above.  All the ways  into this grot were then sealed against
the entry of water  or aught else, all save one. There are now but  two ways
out:  that passage yonder by which you entered  blindfold,  and  through the
Window-curtain into  a deep  bowl  filled  with knives of  stone. Now rest a
