Suddenly they heard  the water again, loud now,  rushing and  splashing. All
round them it seemed, and  they felt a fine rain  on their hands and cheeks.
At last they were set on their  feet once  more. For a moment they stood so,
half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke.
Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. `Let  them see! ' he said.
The scarves  were  removed and  their hoods drawn back, and they blinked and
gasped.
They stood on a wet floor of polished  stone, the doorstep, as it were,
of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But  in  front a thin
veil  of water was hung, so  near that Frodo could  have put an outstretched
arm into it. It  faced westward. The level shafts  of the setting sun behind
beat  upon it, and the red  light was broken  into many flickering  beams of
ever-changing  colour. It  was as if  they  stood  at  the  window  of  some
elven-tower, curtained with threaded  jewels  of silver and  gold, and ruby,
sapphire and amethyst, all kindled with an unconsuming fire.
'At least by good chance we  came at the  right hour  to reward you for
your patience,' said Faramir.  `This is the  Window  of the Sunset,  Henneth
Annyn,  fairest  of all the falls of Ithilien, land  of  many fountains. Few
strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it.
Enter now and see! '
Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the fire faded in the flowing water.
They  turned and passed under  the low forbidding  arch. At  once they found
themselves in a rock-chamber, wide and rough, with an  uneven stooping roof.
A  few torches were kindled  and cast a dim  light on the  glistening walls.
Many men were already there. Others were  still coming in by twos and threes
through a dark narrow door on one side. As their eyes grew accustomed to the
gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was
filled with great store of arms and victuals.
'Well, here is  our refuge,'  said Faramir. `Not a place of  great ease
but here you may pass  the night in peace. It is dry at least,  and there is
food, though no fire. At one  time the water flowed  down  through this cave
and out  of the  arch, but its  course was changed further  up the gorge, by
workmen  of old, and the stream sent down in a fall  of  doubled height over
the rocks  far above.  All the ways  into this grot were then sealed against
the entry of water  or aught else, all save one. There are now but  two ways
out:  that passage yonder by which you entered  blindfold,  and  through the
Window-curtain into  a deep  bowl  filled  with knives of  stone. Now rest a
while, until the evening meal is set.'
The hobbits  were taken to a corner and given a  low bed to lie on,  if
they wished. Meanwhile  men busied themselves about the cave, quietly and in
orderly  quickness. Light  tables  were taken from the walls and  set  up on
trestles and laden  with gear.  This was plain and unadorned  for  the  most
part,  but  all well and fairly,  made:  round platters, bowls and dishes of
glazed brown clay or turned box-wood, smooth and clean. Here and there was a
cup or basin of polished bronze; and a goblet of plain silver was set by the
Captain's seat in the middle of the inmost table.
Faramir went about  among the men, questioning each as he came in, in a
soft  voice. Some came back from the pursuit of  the Southrons; others, left
behind as scouts near the road, came in latest. All  the Southrons  had been
accounted for, save  only the  great mymak:  what happened to him none could
say. Of the enemy no movement could be seen; not even an orc-spy was
abroad.
'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?' Faramir asked of the latest comer.
`Well, no, lord,' said the man. `No Orc at least. But I saw, or thought
I saw,  something a little strange. It was getting deep dusk, when the  eyes
make things greater than they should be. So perhaps it may have been no more
than a squirrel.' Sam pricked up  his ears at this.  'Yet if  so,  it  was a
black squirrel, and I saw no tail. 'Twas like a shadow on the ground, and it
whisked behind a tree-trunk when  I drew  nigh and went up aloft as swift as
any squirrel could.  You will not have us  slay wild  beasts for no purpose,
and it  seemed  no  more, so I  tried  no arrow.  It was too  dark for  sure
shooting anyway, and the creature was gone into the gloom of the leaves in a
twinkling.  But  I stayed  for a  while, for  it seemed strange, and then  I
hastened back. I  thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as  I
turned away.  A large squirrel,  maybe.  Perhaps  under  the  shadow of  the
Unnamed  some of the beasts of Mirkwood are  wandering hither to our
woods.
They have black squirrels there, 'tis said.'
`Perhaps,' said Faramir. `But that would be an ill omen, if it were so.
We do  not want the  escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.'  Sam  fancied that he
gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as he  spoke; but Sam  said nothing.
For a  while he and Frodo lay back and watched the torchlight, and  the  men
moving  to and  fro  speaking in  hushed  voices. Then  suddenly  Frodo fell
asleep.
Sam  struggled with himself, arguing this  way and that. `He may be all
right,' he  thought, 'and then  he  may  not.  Fair  speech may hide  a foul
heart.' He yawned. `I could sleep for a week, and I'd be better  for it. And
what  can  I do, if I do  keep  awake, me all alone, and all these great Men
about? Nothing, Sam Gamgee; but you've got to keep awake  all the same.' And
somehow he managed it. The light faded from the cave door, and the grey veil
of falling water grew dim and was lost in gathering shadow. Always the sound
of the water went on, never changing its note, morning or evening  or night.
It murmured and whispered of sleep. Sam stuck his knuckles in his eyes.
Now more torches  were being  lit. A cask of wine was broached. Storage
barrels were being opened. Men were  fetching water from the fall. Some were
laving  their hands  in  basins. A  wide copper bowl and  a white cloth were
brought to Faramir and he washed.
`Wake our guests,' he said, `and take them water. It is time to eat.'
Frodo sat  up and yawned and  stretched.  Sam, not used to being waited
on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who bowed, holding a basin  of
water before him.
'Put it on the ground, master, if you please! ' he said. 'Easier for me
and you.' Then to  the astonishment and amusement of  the Men he plunged his
head into the cold water and splashed his neck and ears.
'Is it the custom  in  your land to wash the head before supper? ' said
the man who waited on the hobbits.
`No, before  breakfast,' said Sam. `But  if  you're short of sleep cold
water on the neck's like  rain  on a wilted lettuce.  There! Now  I can keep
awake long enough to eat a bit.'
They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels  covered with pelts
and high enough above the  benches of the Men  for their convenience. Before
they ate,  Faramir  and all  his  men turned  and faced west in  a moment of
silence. Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that they should do likewise.
'So we always do.' he  said, as they sat down: `we look towards N®menor
that  was,  and beyond to  Elvenhome that is, and  to  that which  is beyond
Elvenhome and will ever be. Have you no such custom at meat? '
`No,' said  Frodo,  feeling  strangely rustic and untutored. `But if we
are guests, we bow to  our host, and  after we have eaten we rise  and thank
him.'
'That we do also,' said Faramir.
After so long  journeying  and  camping, and  days spent ¤n  the lonely
