'Maybe. But tell me  now of your own fortunes,' said Frodo, turning the
matter  aside  once  again.  `For I  would  learn more  of Minas  Ithil  and
Osgiliath, and  Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What  hope have you for that
city in your long war? '
'What hope have we? '  said Faramir. 'It is long since we had any hope.
The  sword  of Elendil, if it  returns indeed, may rekindle it, but I do not
think  that it will  do  more than put off the evil  day,  unless other help
unlooked-for also comes, from Elves or  Men.  For the Enemy increases and we
decrease. We are a failing people, a springless autumn.
`The Men of N®menor were settled far and wide on the shores and seaward
regions  of the Great Lands, but for the  most part they fell into evils and
follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness and the black arts; some
were
given over wholly to  idleness and  ease, and some fought among  themselves,
until they were conquered in their weakness by the wild men.
`It is not  said  that evil arts were ever practised in Gondor, or that
the Nameless One  was ever named in  honour there;  and the  old wisdom  and
beauty brought  out of  the West remained long in the realm of  the sons  of
Elendil  the Fair, and they linger  there still.  Yet even so  it was Gondor
that brought  about  its  own decay,  falling by  degrees  into dotage,  and
thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who was only banished not destroyed.
'Death was ever present, because the N®menoreans still,  as they had in
their old kingdom,  and so lost it,  hungered after endless life unchanging.
Kings made tombs more  splendid than  houses of the living. and counted  old
names in the rolls of their descent dearer than the names of sons. Childless
lords sat in aged halls musing on heraldry; in  secret chambers withered men
compounded  strong  elixirs, or  in high cold  towers asked questions of the
stars. And the last king of the line of Anbrion had no heir.
`But  the  stewards  were wiser  and more  fortunate. Wiser,  for  they
recruited the strength  of our people from the sturdy folk of the sea-coast,
and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered  Nimrais. And they made a truce with
the proud peoples of the  North,  who  often had assailed us, men of  fierce
valour, but our kin from afar  off, unlike the wild Easterlings or the cruel
Haradrim.
'So it came to  pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward  (and my
father is the sit and twentieth) that they rode  to our aid and at the great
Field  of Celebrant they  destroyed our enemies that had seized our northern
provinces. These are the Rohirrim,  as we name them, masters  of horses, and
we ceded to them the fields of Calenardhon  that are since called Rohan; for
that province  had  long been sparsely peopled. And they became  our allies,
and have  ever  proved true  to us,  aiding us  at  need,  and  guarding our
northern marches and the Gap of Rohan.
`Of our  lore and manners they have learned what they would,  and their
lords speak our speech at need; yet for  the most part they hold by the ways
of their  own  fathers and  to their  own  memories, and  they  speak  among
themselves  their own North  tongue. And  we  love them: tall men  and  fair
women,  valiant  both  alike, golden-haired, bright-eyed,  and strong;  they
remind us of the youth of Men, as they were in the  Elder Days. Indeed it is
said by our lore-masters that they  have from of  old  this affinity with us
that they  are  come  from those same  Three  Houses  of  Men  as  were  the
N®menoreans  in  their  beginning  not  from  Hador  the  Goldenhaired,  the
Elf-friend, maybe, yet from such of his sons and people as went not over Sea
into the West, refusing the call.
'For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men of the
West, which  were N®menoreans; and  the Middle Peoples, Men of the
Twilight,
such as are  the Rohirrim and their kin  that  dwell still far in the North;
and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.
`Yet  now,  if the  Rohirrim are  grown in  some  ways more like to us,
enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too  have become more like  to them, and
can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the
Twilight, but with memory of other things.  For  as the Rohirrim do, we  now
love  war  and valour as things good in themselves, both a sport and an end;
and  though  we still  hold  that  a  warrior  should have more  skills  and
knowledge than only the craft of weapons  and slaying, we esteem a  warrior,
nonetheless, above men  of other  crafts.  Such is the need  of our days. So
even was  my brother,  Boromir:  a  man of  prowess,  and for  that  he  was
accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of
Minas  Tirith has  for long  years  been so hardy  in  toil, so  onward into
battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.' Faramir sighed and fell
silent for a while.
`You don't say much in all your tales  about the Elves, sir,' said Sam,
suddenly plucking up courage. He  had noted that Faramir seemed  to refer to
Elves with reverence, and this even more than his courtesy, and his food and
wine, had won Sam's respect and quieted his suspicions.
`No indeed, Master Samwise,' said Faramir, `for  I  am  not  learned in
Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we have changed,
declining from N®menor to  Middle-earth. For as you may know, if
Mithrandir
was  your companion and you have spoken with Elrond, the Edain,  the Fathers
of the  N®menoreans,  fought  beside the  Elves in the first  wars, and were
rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of
Elvenhome. But in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days
of
darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time in which
each  kind  walked  further down  their sundered  roads. Men  now  fear  and
misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And we of  Gondor grow like
other  Men, like  the men of  Rohan; for even they, who are the  foes of the
Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread.
`Yet there are among us still  some  who have dealings  with the  Elves
when they may, and  ever and anon one will go in secret to Lurien, seldom to
return. Not I.  For I deem it perilous now for  mortal man  wilfully to seek
out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady.'
`The Lady of Lurien!  Galadriel!' cried Sam. `You should see her indeed
you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my job at home, sir, if
you understand me, and I'm  not much good at poetry -- not  at making  it: a
bit of  a comic rhyme, perhaps. now and again, you know, but not real poetry
-- so I can't tell you what I mean. It ought to  be sung. You'd have  to get
Strider,  Aragorn that is, or  old Mr. Bilbo, for that.  But I wish  I could
make a song about her. Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great
tree  in flower,  sometimes like a white  daffadowndilly, small and  slender
like. Hard  as di'monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight,  cold as frost
in the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any lass
I  ever saw with daisies  in  her hair in  springtime.  But that's a lot  o'
nonsense, and all wide of my mark.'
'Then she must be lovely indeed,' said Faramir. `Perilously fair.'
`I don't know about      perilous  ,' said Sam. `It strikes me that folk takes
their  peril  with them into Lurien,  and finds  it  there  because  they've
brought it. But perhaps you could call her perilous, because she's so strong
in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on  a
rock;  or drownd  yourself, like a hobbit in a  river. But  neither rock nor
