wine, had won Sam's respect and quieted his suspicions.
`No indeed, Master Samwise,' said Faramir, `for  I  am  not  learned in
Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we have changed,
declining from N®menor to  Middle-earth. For as you may know, if
Mithrandir
was  your companion and you have spoken with Elrond, the Edain,  the Fathers
of the  N®menoreans,  fought  beside the  Elves in the first  wars, and were
rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of
Elvenhome. But in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days
of
darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time in which
each  kind  walked  further down  their sundered  roads. Men  now  fear  and
misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And we of  Gondor grow like
other  Men, like  the men of  Rohan; for even they, who are the  foes of the
Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread.
`Yet there are among us still  some  who have dealings  with the  Elves
when they may, and  ever and anon one will go in secret to Lurien, seldom to
return. Not I.  For I deem it perilous now for  mortal man  wilfully to seek
out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady.'
`The Lady of Lurien!  Galadriel!' cried Sam. `You should see her indeed
you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my job at home, sir, if
you understand me, and I'm  not much good at poetry -- not  at making  it: a
bit of  a comic rhyme, perhaps. now and again, you know, but not real poetry
-- so I can't tell you what I mean. It ought to  be sung. You'd have  to get
Strider,  Aragorn that is, or  old Mr. Bilbo, for that.  But I wish  I could
make a song about her. Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great
tree  in flower,  sometimes like a white  daffadowndilly, small and  slender
like. Hard  as di'monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight,  cold as frost
in the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any lass
I  ever saw with daisies  in  her hair in  springtime.  But that's a lot  o'
nonsense, and all wide of my mark.'
'Then she must be lovely indeed,' said Faramir. `Perilously fair.'
`I don't know about      perilous  ,' said Sam. `It strikes me that folk takes
their  peril  with them into Lurien,  and finds  it  there  because  they've
brought it. But perhaps you could call her perilous, because she's so strong
in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on  a
rock;  or drownd  yourself, like a hobbit in a  river. But  neither rock nor
river would be to blame. Now Boro -- ' He stopped and went red in the face.
`Yes?  Now Boromir        you would say?  ' said Faramir. `What would  you say?
He took his peril with him? '
`Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a  fine man as your brother was if I
may say  so.  But  you've  been  warm on  the scent all along. Now I watched
Boromir  and listened to him, from Rivendell  all down the  road --  looking
after my master, as you'll understand,  and not meaning any harm to  Boromir
-- and it's my  opinion that  in Lurien he first  saw clearly what I guessed
sooner: what  he  wanted.  From the  moment he  first  saw it he  wanted the
Enemy's Ring! '
`Sam!  '  cried Frodo  aghast. He had fallen deep into his own thoughts
for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late.
'Save me! ' said Sam turning white, and then flushing scarlet. `There I
go  again!     When ever  you open your big mouth you put your foot  in it  the
Gaffer used to say to me       , and right enough. O dear, O dear!
`Now look here,  sir!  ' He turned, facing up  to Faramir with  all the
courage  that he  could muster. `Don't you go taking advantage of my  master
because his servant's no better than a fool. You've spoken very handsome all
along,  put me off my  guard,  talking of Elves and all. But                 handsome is as
handsome does        we say. Now's a chance to show your quality.'
'So  it seems,' said Faramir,  slowly and  very  softly, with a strange
smile.  `So that  is the answer  to all the riddles! The One Ring  that  was
thought to  have perished  from  the world. And Boromir tried to take  it by
force? And you escaped? And ran all the way -- to me! And here in the wild I
have  you:  two halflings,  and a host of men at  my  call, and the  Ring of
Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune!  A chance for Faramir, Captain of Gondor,
to show his quality! Ha!'  He stood up,  very tall and stern, his  grey eyes
glinting.
Frodo and Sam sprang from their stools and set themselves  side by side
with their backs  to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilts.  There was  a
silence.  All the men in the cave stopped talking and looked towards them in
wonder. But Faramir sat down  again in his chair and began to laugh quietly,
and then suddenly became grave again.
'Alas  for Boromir! It was too sore a trial!  ' he said. `How you  have
increased my sorrow, you two  strange wanderers from a  far country, bearing
the peril of Men! But you are less judges of Men than I of Halflings. We are
truth-speakers, we men  of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or die
in the attempt.    Not if  I found it  on the  highway would I take it             I said.
Even if I were such a man as  to desire this thing, and  even though I  knew
not clearly what  this thing was  when  I spoke, still I should  take  those
words as a vow, and be held by them.
'But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough  to  know that  there are
some  perils from which a  man  must  flee.  Sit at peace! And be comforted,
Samwise. If  you seem to have stumbled, think  that it was  fated to  be so.
Your heart is shrewd as  well  as  faithful, and saw clearer than your eyes.
For  strange though it  may seem,  it was safe to declare this to me. It may
even help the  master that you love. It shall turn to his good, if it is  in
my power. So be comforted. But do not even name this thing again aloud. Once
is enough.'
The hobbits came back  to  their seats and sat very  quiet. Men  turned
back to  their drink and their talk, perceiving  that their captain had  had
some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over.
'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,' said Faramir. 'If
you took this thing on yourself, unwilling, at others' asking, then you have
pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep  it hid and not to use
it.  You  are a  new people and a new world to me. Are  all your kin of like
sort? Your  land  must  be a realm  of peace  and content,  and  there  must
gardeners be in high honour.'
`Not all  is  well  there,'  said Frodo, `but  certainly gardeners  are
honoured.'
`But folk  must  grow weary  there, even  in their  gardens, as  do all
things under the Sun  of this world. And you are far from  home and wayworn.
No more tonight. Sleep, both  of you -- in peace, if you can. Fear not! I do
not wish to  see it, or  touch  it, or know more of it than I know (which is
enough), lest peril perchance waylay  me and I  fall lower  in the test than
Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest -- but  first tell  me only, if you will,
whither you wish to go,  and  what  to do.  For I must watch, and  wait, and
think.  Time passes.  In the morning  we  must each  go swiftly  on the ways
appointed to us.'
Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now
a great  weariness came  down on him like  a  cloud. He could dissemble  and
resist no longer.
'I was going to find a way into Mordor,' he said faintly. `I  was going
to Gorgoroth. I must  find  the Mountain of Fire and cast the thing into the
