in the attempt.    Not if  I found it  on the  highway would I take it             I said.
Even if I were such a man as  to desire this thing, and  even though I  knew
not clearly what  this thing was  when  I spoke, still I should  take  those
words as a vow, and be held by them.
'But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough  to  know that  there are
some  perils from which a  man  must  flee.  Sit at peace! And be comforted,
Samwise. If  you seem to have stumbled, think  that it was  fated to  be so.
Your heart is shrewd as  well  as  faithful, and saw clearer than your eyes.
For  strange though it  may seem,  it was safe to declare this to me. It may
even help the  master that you love. It shall turn to his good, if it is  in
my power. So be comforted. But do not even name this thing again aloud. Once
is enough.'
The hobbits came back  to  their seats and sat very  quiet. Men  turned
back to  their drink and their talk, perceiving  that their captain had  had
some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over.
'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,' said Faramir. 'If
you took this thing on yourself, unwilling, at others' asking, then you have
pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep  it hid and not to use
it.  You  are a  new people and a new world to me. Are  all your kin of like
sort? Your  land  must  be a realm  of peace  and content,  and  there  must
gardeners be in high honour.'
`Not all  is  well  there,'  said Frodo, `but  certainly gardeners  are
honoured.'
`But folk  must  grow weary  there, even  in their  gardens, as  do all
things under the Sun  of this world. And you are far from  home and wayworn.
No more tonight. Sleep, both  of you -- in peace, if you can. Fear not! I do
not wish to  see it, or  touch  it, or know more of it than I know (which is
enough), lest peril perchance waylay  me and I  fall lower  in the test than
Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest -- but  first tell  me only, if you will,
whither you wish to go,  and  what  to do.  For I must watch, and  wait, and
think.  Time passes.  In the morning  we  must each  go swiftly  on the ways
appointed to us.'
Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now
a great  weariness came  down on him like  a  cloud. He could dissemble  and
resist no longer.
'I was going to find a way into Mordor,' he said faintly. `I  was going
to Gorgoroth. I must  find  the Mountain of Fire and cast the thing into the
gulf of Doom. Gandalf said so. I do not think I shall ever get there.'
Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then suddenly
he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried him  to the  bed
and laid  him there,  and covered him warmly.  At  once he fell into a  deep
sleep.
Another bed  was  set beside him for his  servant. Sam hesitated for  a
moment, then bowing very low: `Good night, Captain, my lord,' he said.  `You
took the chance, sir.'
`Did I so?' said Faramir.
`Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.'
Faramir smiled. 'A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of
the  praiseworthy is above all rewards.  Yet  there  was naught  in  this to
praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.'
`Ah  well,  sir,' said Sam, `you said  my master had an elvish air  and
that was good and true. But I can say this:  you have an air too, sir,  that
reminds me of, of -- well, Gandalf, of wizards.
'Maybe,'  said  Faramir. `Maybe you discern from  far away the  air  of
N®menor. Good night!'
Chapter 6. The Forbidden Pool
Frodo  woke to  find  Faramir bending over him. For a  second old fears
seized him and he sat up and shrank away.
`There is nothing to fear,' said Faramir.
'Is it morning already? ' said Frodo yawning.
`Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting.
Will  you  come and see it?  Also there  is a matter on which I desire  your
counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you come? '
`I will,' said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm
blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the  fireless  cave. The  noise of  the
water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed Faramir.
Sam, waking  suddenly  by some instinct of watchfulness,  saw first his
master's empty  bed  and  leapt to his feet. Then  he saw  two dark figures,
Frodo  and a  man, framed  against the archway, which was now filled with  a
pale  white  light. He  hurried after  them,  past rows of men  sleeping  on
mattresses along the  wall. As he went by  the  cave-mouth  he saw  that the
Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread:
melting icicles of moonlight. But he did not pause to admire it, and turning
aside he followed his  master through the narrow  doorway in the wall of the
cave.
They went first  along a black passage, then up  many wet steps, and so
came to a small flat  landing cut in the stone  and  lit  by  the pale  sky,
gleaming  high  above through a  long deep shaft.  From here two flights  of
steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high bank of the stream;
the other turning away to the left. This they  followed. It wound its way up
like a turret-stair.
At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were
on a wide  flat rock without rail or parapet. At their right, eastwards, the
torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then,  pouring down  a steep
race, it filled  a smooth-hewn channel with  a  dark  force of water flecked
with foam,  and curling and rushing almost at  their  feet it  plunged sheer
over the  edge that  yawned  upon their left.  A man  stood  there, near the
brink, silent, gazing down.
Frodo turned to  watch the sleek necks of the  water as they curved and
