Chapter 6. The Forbidden Pool
Frodo  woke to  find  Faramir bending over him. For a  second old fears
seized him and he sat up and shrank away.
`There is nothing to fear,' said Faramir.
'Is it morning already? ' said Frodo yawning.
`Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting.
Will  you  come and see it?  Also there  is a matter on which I desire  your
counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you come? '
`I will,' said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm
blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the  fireless  cave. The  noise of  the
water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed Faramir.
Sam, waking  suddenly  by some instinct of watchfulness,  saw first his
master's empty  bed  and  leapt to his feet. Then  he saw  two dark figures,
Frodo  and a  man, framed  against the archway, which was now filled with  a
pale  white  light. He  hurried after  them,  past rows of men  sleeping  on
mattresses along the  wall. As he went by  the  cave-mouth  he saw  that the
Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread:
melting icicles of moonlight. But he did not pause to admire it, and turning
aside he followed his  master through the narrow  doorway in the wall of the
cave.
They went first  along a black passage, then up  many wet steps, and so
came to a small flat  landing cut in the stone  and  lit  by  the pale  sky,
gleaming  high  above through a  long deep shaft.  From here two flights  of
steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high bank of the stream;
the other turning away to the left. This they  followed. It wound its way up
like a turret-stair.
At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were
on a wide  flat rock without rail or parapet. At their right, eastwards, the
torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then,  pouring down  a steep
race, it filled  a smooth-hewn channel with  a  dark  force of water flecked
with foam,  and curling and rushing almost at  their  feet it  plunged sheer
over the  edge that  yawned  upon their left.  A man  stood  there, near the
brink, silent, gazing down.
Frodo turned to  watch the sleek necks of the  water as they curved and
dived.  Then he lifted his  eyes and gazed far away. The world was quiet and
cold,  as if dawn were near. Far off in  the West the full moon was sinking,
round and white. Pale mists shimmered in the  great vale below:  a wide gulf
of silver fume,  beneath which rolled the cool night-waters of the Anduin. A
black  darkness  loomed beyond,  and  in  it glinted, here and  there, cold,
sharp, remote, white as  the teeth of ghosts, the peaks of Ered Nimrais, the
White Mountains of the Realm of Gondor, tipped with everlasting snow.
For a while Frodo  stood  there on  the  high stone, and  a shiver  ran
through him,  wondering if anywhere in  the vastness  of the night-lands his
old companions walked  or slept,  or lay dead  shrouded in  mist. Why was he
brought here out of forgetful sleep?
Sam was eager for  an answer to the same question and could not refrain
himself from muttering, for  his master's ear alone as  he thought: 'It's  a
fine view, no doubt, Mr. Frodo, but chilly to the heart, not to mention  the
bones! What's going on? '
Faramir heard and answered. `Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes
from Middle-earth,  glances upon  the white  locks of old Mindolluin.  It is
worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for
you,  Samwise,  you  were not  brought, and  do but pay  the penalty of your
watchfulness. A draught of wine shall amend it. Come, look now! '
He  stepped  up beside the silent sentinel on the dark  edge. and Frodo
followed.  Sam  hung back. He already felt insecure enough on this high  wet
platform. Faramir and Frodo looked down. Far below them they  saw  the white
waters pour into  a foaming  bowl, and then  swirl darkly about  a deep oval
basin in the rocks. until they found  their  way out  again through a narrow
gate, and  flowed away, fuming  and  chattering, into  calmer and more level
reaches. The moonlight still slanted down to the  fall's foot and gleamed on
the ripples of the basin. Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on
the  near bank,  but  even as he  looked at  it, it  dived and vanished just
beyond the boil and bubble of the fall, cleaving the  black  water as neatly
as an arrow or an edgewise stone.
Faramir turned to the man at his side. `Now what would you  say that it
is,  Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingfisher? Are there black kingfishers in the
night-pools of Mirkwood? '
`'Tis not a bird, whatever else it  be,' answered  Anborn. `It has four
limbs and  dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft it  shows, too. What
is it at? Seeking a way  up behind  the Curtain to our hidings?  It seems we
are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers,
nigh  as good  marksmen  as myself, on  either bank.  We  wait only for your
command to shoot, Captain.'
`Shall we shoot? ' said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo.
Frodo did not answer  for a moment. Then `No! ' he said. `No! I beg you
not to.' If Sam had dared, he  would have said `Yes,' quicker and louder. He
could not see, but  he guessed well  enough from  their words what they were
looking at.
'You  know,  then, what this thing is? '  said Faramir.  `Come, now you
have  seen,  tell me why it should be  spared. In all our words together you
have not once  spoken  of your gangrel companion, and I  let him be for  the
time.  He could  wait till he  was  caught and  brought before me. I sent my
keenest huntsmen to seek  him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of
him till now, save Anborn here, once  at dusk yesterevening. But now  he has
done worse trespass than  only  to go  coney-snaring in the uplands: he  has
dared to come to Henneth  Annyn,  and his life is forfeit.  I marvel at  the
creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before
our very window. Does he think  that men sleep without watch all  night? Why
does he so?'
'There are two answers, I think,' said  Frodo. `For one thing, he knows
little of Men, and sly though he  is, your refuge is so  hidden that perhaps
he  does  not know that Men are concealed here.  For another, I think  he is
allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.'
`He is lured here, you  say? ' said  Faramir in  a low voice. `Can  he,
does he then know of your burden? '
`Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.'
' He   bore  it? ' said Faramir, breathing sharply in  his wonder.  `This
matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? '
'Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.'
`What then does the creature seek? '
`Fish,' said Frodo. `Look! '
They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head  appeared at the
far end of the basin,  just out of the deep shadow of the rocks. There was a
brief silver glint, and a swirl  of tiny ripples. It swam to  the side,  and
then with  marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and
up the bank. At once it sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing
that glittered  as it  turned:  the  last rays of the moon  were now falling
