are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers,
nigh  as good  marksmen  as myself, on  either bank.  We  wait only for your
command to shoot, Captain.'
`Shall we shoot? ' said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo.
Frodo did not answer  for a moment. Then `No! ' he said. `No! I beg you
not to.' If Sam had dared, he  would have said `Yes,' quicker and louder. He
could not see, but  he guessed well  enough from  their words what they were
looking at.
'You  know,  then, what this thing is? '  said Faramir.  `Come, now you
have  seen,  tell me why it should be  spared. In all our words together you
have not once  spoken  of your gangrel companion, and I  let him be for  the
time.  He could  wait till he  was  caught and  brought before me. I sent my
keenest huntsmen to seek  him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of
him till now, save Anborn here, once  at dusk yesterevening. But now  he has
done worse trespass than  only  to go  coney-snaring in the uplands: he  has
dared to come to Henneth  Annyn,  and his life is forfeit.  I marvel at  the
creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before
our very window. Does he think  that men sleep without watch all  night? Why
does he so?'
'There are two answers, I think,' said  Frodo. `For one thing, he knows
little of Men, and sly though he  is, your refuge is so  hidden that perhaps
he  does  not know that Men are concealed here.  For another, I think  he is
allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.'
`He is lured here, you  say? ' said  Faramir in  a low voice. `Can  he,
does he then know of your burden? '
`Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.'
' He   bore  it? ' said Faramir, breathing sharply in  his wonder.  `This
matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? '
'Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.'
`What then does the creature seek? '
`Fish,' said Frodo. `Look! '
They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head  appeared at the
far end of the basin,  just out of the deep shadow of the rocks. There was a
brief silver glint, and a swirl  of tiny ripples. It swam to  the side,  and
then with  marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and
up the bank. At once it sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing
that glittered  as it  turned:  the  last rays of the moon  were now falling
behind the stony wall at the pool's end.
Faramir  laughed softly.  `Fish! '  he said.  `It  is  a less  perilous
hunger. Or maybe not: fish from  the pool of Henneth Annyn  may cost him all
he has to give.'
`Now I have him at the arrow-point,' said Anborn. `Shall  I not  shoot,
Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.'
`Wait, Anborn,'  said Faramir.  `This is a harder matter than it seems.
What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare? '
`The creature is wretched and hungry,' said Frodo, `and unaware of  his
danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he  would have  bidden you not to slay
him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not
know clearly why, and  of what I guess I cannot  speak openly out  here. But
this creature is in some way bound up with my errand. Until you found us and
took us, he was my guide.'
`Your guide! ' said Faramir. `The matter becomes ever stranger. I would
do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this sly wanderer go
free at his own will from here, to join you later if it please him, or to be
caught by  Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain
or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very swiftly. But how can  this slippery
thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft? '
`Let me go  down quietly to him,' said Frodo. `You  may keep  your bows
bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.'
`Go  then and be swift! ' said Faramir. `If  he  comes  off  alive,  he
should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo
down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a nose and ears. Give
me your bow.'
Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding  stair to the  landing,
and then up the other stair, until  at  last they  came to a narrow  opening
shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through, Frodo found himself on
the top of  the southern bank above the pool. It  was now dark and the falls
were  pale and grey,  reflecting only the lingering moonlight of the western
sky. He could not see Gollum. He went forward  a  short way and Anborn
came
softly behind him.
`Go on!  ' he breathed in  Frodo's ear.  `Have a care to your right. If
you  fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And
forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.'
Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way and to
steady himself.  The rocks  were  for  the  most part  flat  and smooth  but
slippery.  He halted listening.  At first he  could  hear  no sound but  the
unceasing  rush of  the  fall behind him. Then presently he  heard,  not far
ahead, a hissing murmur.
'Fissh, nice fissh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes.
Now we can eat fish in  peace. No, not in peace,  precious. For Precious  is
lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left us,              gollum   ; and
Precious is gone.  Only poor  Smjagol all  alone.  No Precious.  Nasty  Men,
they'll  take  it,  steal my Precious. Thieves.  We  hates them. Fissh, nice
fissh: Makes  us  strong.  Makes eyes bright,  fingers  tight, yes. Throttle
them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice
fissh! '
So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall,  only  interrupted
by  a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo  shivered, listening with
pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he  never need hear that
voice again. Anborn  was not far behind. He  could creep back and ask him to
get the huntsmen  to shoot.  They  would probably get  close  enough,  while
Gollum was gorging and off his guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be
rid of the miserable voice  for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now.
The  servant has a  claim on the master  for service, even  service in fear.
They  would have foundered  in the Dead Marshes but for  Gollum. Frodo
knew,
too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it.
`Smjagol! ' he said softly.
`Fissh, nice fissh,' said the voice.
`Smjagol! ' he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.
`Smjagol,  Master  has come to  look  for  you. Master  is here.  Come,
Smjagol! ' There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath.
'Come, Smjagol! ' said Frodo. `We are in danger.  Men will kill you, if
they find  you  here. Come quickly, if you  wish  to escape  death.  Come to
Master!'
'No!' said the  voice.  `Not nice Master. Leaves  poor Smjagol and goes
with new friends. Master can wait. Smjagol hasn't finished.'
`There's no time,' said Frodo. `Bring fish with you. Come! '
`No! Must finish fish.'
'Smjagol! ' said Frodo desperately. 'Precious  will be angry.  I  shall
