Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way and to
steady himself.  The rocks  were  for  the  most part  flat  and smooth  but
slippery.  He halted listening.  At first he  could  hear  no sound but  the
unceasing  rush of  the  fall behind him. Then presently he  heard,  not far
ahead, a hissing murmur.
'Fissh, nice fissh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes.
Now we can eat fish in  peace. No, not in peace,  precious. For Precious  is
lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left us,              gollum   ; and
Precious is gone.  Only poor  Smjagol all  alone.  No Precious.  Nasty  Men,
they'll  take  it,  steal my Precious. Thieves.  We  hates them. Fissh, nice
fissh: Makes  us  strong.  Makes eyes bright,  fingers  tight, yes. Throttle
them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice
fissh! '
So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall,  only  interrupted
by  a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo  shivered, listening with
pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he  never need hear that
voice again. Anborn  was not far behind. He  could creep back and ask him to
get the huntsmen  to shoot.  They  would probably get  close  enough,  while
Gollum was gorging and off his guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be
rid of the miserable voice  for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now.
The  servant has a  claim on the master  for service, even  service in fear.
They  would have foundered  in the Dead Marshes but for  Gollum. Frodo
knew,
too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it.
`Smjagol! ' he said softly.
`Fissh, nice fissh,' said the voice.
`Smjagol! ' he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.
`Smjagol,  Master  has come to  look  for  you. Master  is here.  Come,
Smjagol! ' There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath.
'Come, Smjagol! ' said Frodo. `We are in danger.  Men will kill you, if
they find  you  here. Come quickly, if you  wish  to escape  death.  Come to
Master!'
'No!' said the  voice.  `Not nice Master. Leaves  poor Smjagol and goes
with new friends. Master can wait. Smjagol hasn't finished.'
`There's no time,' said Frodo. `Bring fish with you. Come! '
`No! Must finish fish.'
'Smjagol! ' said Frodo desperately. 'Precious  will be angry.  I  shall
take Precious, and I shall say: make  him swallow the bones and choke. Never
taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! '
There  was  a sharp  hiss.  Presently  out of  the darkness Gollum came
crawling  on all  fours,  like  an  erring  dog  called  to  heel. He had  a
half-eaten fish  in  his  mouth  and another  in his hand. He came  close to
Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him.  His pale eyes were shining.
Then he took the fish out of his mouth and stood up.
`Nice Master! ' he whispered. `Nice  hobbit, come back to poor Smjagol.
Good Smjagol comes. Now let's go, go quickly, yes. Through the  trees, while
the Faces are dark. Yes, come let's go! '
`Yes,  we'll go soon,' said Frodo. `But not at once. I will go with you
as  I promised. I promise again.  But  not now. You are not safe yet. I will
save you, but you must trust me.'
`We  must trust  Master? ' said Gollum doubtfully.  'Why? Why not go at
once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is he?'
'Away up there,' said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. 'I am not going
without him. We must go back to him.' His heart sank. This was too much like
trickery.  He did not  really fear that  Faramir would allow  Gollum  to  be
killed, but  he would probably make him prisoner and bind him; and certainly
what Frodo did would seem a treachery to  the poor  treacherous creature. It
would  probably be impossible ever to  make  him understand  or believe that
Frodo had saved his life in the only way he could. What else could he do? --
to keep faith,  as  near  as might be, with both sides. `Come!' he said. `Or
the Precious will be angry. We are  going back now, up the stream. Go on, go
on, you go in front! '
Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snuffling and
suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. `Something's  there! '
he  said.  `Not a  hobbit.'  Suddenly  he turned  back.  A  green  light was
flickering in  his  bulging  eyes.  `Masster, masster!'  he hissed. 'Wicked!
Tricksy! False!' He spat and stretched out his long arms with white snapping
fingers.
At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind him and
came down  on him. A large strong hand took him in the nape of the neck  and
pinned him. He  twisted round  like lightning,  all wet and slimy as he was,
wriggling like an eel, biting  and  scratching like  a cat. But two more men
came up out of the shadows.
'Hold still!  '  said one. `Or we'll stick  you  as full  of pins as  a
hedgehog. Hold still!'
Gollum  went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too
gently.
`Easy, easy! ' said Frodo. `He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt
him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. Smjagol! They won't
hurt you. I'll go with you, and you shall  come to no  harm. Not unless they
kill me too. Trust Master! '
Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked  him up, put  a hood over
his eyes, and carried him off.
Frodo  followed them, feeling  very wretched.  They  went  through  the
opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs  and passages, into the
cave. Two or three  torches  had been lit. Men were stirring. Sam was there,
and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the men carried. `Got him?'
he said to Frodo.
'Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He  came to me, because  he trusted me
at  first, I'm afraid.  I did not want him tied up like this. I hope it will
be all right; but I hate the whole business.'
`So  do I,' said Sam. `And nothing will ever  be all  right  where that
piece of misery is.'
A man came and beckoned to the  hobbits, and took them to the recess at
the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in  his  chair, and the lamp
had been  rekindled  in its  niche above his head. He signed to them to  sit
down  on the  stools beside him. `Bring wine for the guests,'  he said. `And
bring the prisoner to me.'
The wine was brought, and then  Anborn came carrying Gollum. He
removed
the cover from  Gollum's head and set him on his feet standing behind him to
support him. Gollum blinked, hooding the malice of his eyes with their heavy
pale lids. A  very miserable creature he looked, dripping and dank, smelling
of fish (he still clutched one in his  hand); his sparse locks were  hanging
like rank weed over his bony brows, his nose was snivelling.
`Loose us! Loose us! '  he said.  `The  cord hurts us, yes it does,  it
hurts us, and we've done nothing.'
`Nothing? ' said  Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen
glance, but  without any expression in his face either of anger, or pity, or
wonder. 'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of
worse
