hedgehog. Hold still!'
Gollum  went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too
gently.
`Easy, easy! ' said Frodo. `He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt
him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. Smjagol! They won't
hurt you. I'll go with you, and you shall  come to no  harm. Not unless they
kill me too. Trust Master! '
Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked  him up, put  a hood over
his eyes, and carried him off.
Frodo  followed them, feeling  very wretched.  They  went  through  the
opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs  and passages, into the
cave. Two or three  torches  had been lit. Men were stirring. Sam was there,
and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the men carried. `Got him?'
he said to Frodo.
'Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He  came to me, because  he trusted me
at  first, I'm afraid.  I did not want him tied up like this. I hope it will
be all right; but I hate the whole business.'
`So  do I,' said Sam. `And nothing will ever  be all  right  where that
piece of misery is.'
A man came and beckoned to the  hobbits, and took them to the recess at
the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in  his  chair, and the lamp
had been  rekindled  in its  niche above his head. He signed to them to  sit
down  on the  stools beside him. `Bring wine for the guests,'  he said. `And
bring the prisoner to me.'
The wine was brought, and then  Anborn came carrying Gollum. He
removed
the cover from  Gollum's head and set him on his feet standing behind him to
support him. Gollum blinked, hooding the malice of his eyes with their heavy
pale lids. A  very miserable creature he looked, dripping and dank, smelling
of fish (he still clutched one in his  hand); his sparse locks were  hanging
like rank weed over his bony brows, his nose was snivelling.
`Loose us! Loose us! '  he said.  `The  cord hurts us, yes it does,  it
hurts us, and we've done nothing.'
`Nothing? ' said  Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen
glance, but  without any expression in his face either of anger, or pity, or
wonder. 'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of
worse
punishment? However, that  is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight  you
have  come  where  it  is  death to come. The fish of this  pool  are dearly
bought.'
Gollum dropped the fish from his hand. `Don't want fish,' he said.
'The  price  is not set on the fish,' said  Faramir. `Only to come here
and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at
the  prayer  of Frodo here, who says that  of him at least you have deserved
some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is  your name? Whence do
you
come? And whither do you go? What is your business? '
`We are  lost, lost,' said  Gollum. 'No name, no business, no Precious,
nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we  are hungry. A  few little fishes,
nasty bony little fishes, for a  poor creature, and they say  death. So wise
they are; so just, so very just.'
'Not very wise,' said Faramir.  'But just: yes perhaps, as just  as our
little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! ' Faramir  took a small  nail-knife
from his belt and  handed it to Frodo. Gollum misunderstanding  the gesture,
squealed and fell down.
'Now, Smjagol! ' said Frodo. 'You must trust me. I will not desert you.
Answer truthfully, if you can.  It will  do you  good not  harm.' He cut the
cords on Gollum's wrists and ankles and raised him to his feet.
'Come hither! ' said Faramir. `Look at me! Do you know the name of this
place? Have you been here before? '
Slowly Gollum  raised his eyes and  looked  unwillingly into Faramir's.
All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale for a moment into
the clear unwavering  eyes of the man of Gondor. There  was a still silence.
Then Gollum dropped his  head and shrank down, until he was squatting on the
floor,  shivering.  'We  doesn't  know  and we  doesn't want  to  know,'  he
whimpered. `Never came here; never come again.'
`There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms
behind them,' said Faramir. `But in this I judge  that you speak  the truth.
It is well  for you. What oath will  you swear never to return; and never to
lead any living creature hither by word or sign?'
`Master knows,'  said Gollum with a  sidelong glance at Frodo. `Yes, he
knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We'll promise to It, yes.' He
crawled  to Frodo's feet.  'Save  us,  nice Master!  '  he whined.  `Smjagol
promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no
never! No, precious, no!'
`Are you satisfied? ' said Faramir.
`Yes,' said Frodo.  'At least, you must  either  accept this promise or
carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came  to
me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.'
Faramir sat for a moment in thought. `Very good,' he  said at last.  `I
surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he
will do with you! '
'But, Lord Faramir,' said Frodo bowing, `you have not yet declared your
will  concerning  the said Frodo, and until  that is  made known, he  cannot
shape his plans for himself  or his companions. Your judgement was postponed
until the morning; but that is now at hand.'
`Then I  will declare my doom,' said Faramir. `As for you, Frodo, in so
far as lies in me under higher  authority, I declare you  free in  the realm
of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you
nor any that go with you have leave to come  to  this  place unbidden.  This
doom  shall  stand for a  year and a day, and  then cease,  unless you shall
before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to  the  Lord and
Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and
to make  it  lifelong.  In the  meantime,  whomsoever  you  take  under your
protection shall be under my protection  and under the shield of Gondor. Are
you answered? '
Frodo bowed low. 'I am answered,' he  said, `and I place myself at your
service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.'
`It is  of  great  worth,' said  Faramir.  'And  now, do you  take this
creature, this Smjagol, under your protection? '
`I  do  take  Smjagol under  my  protection,' said  Frodo.  Sam  sighed
audibly;  and  not  at  the courtesies, of which, as  any  hobbit  would, he
thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a
great many more words and bows.
'Then I say  to you,' said Faramir, turning to  Gollum, 'you  are under
doom of  death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet
if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall
fall. And may death find  you swiftly, within Gondor or  without,  if you do
not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his
guide,
he says. Whither were you leading him? ' Gollum made no reply.
