through  the lands.  The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey,
and
those that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend;
and  may the stars shine upon the end  of your road! Seldom have we had such
delight in strangers,  and it  is  fair to hear words  of the Ancient Speech
from the lips of other wanderers in the world.'
Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor  finished speaking. 'I
will sleep now,' he said; and the  Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and
he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber.
Chapter 4. A Short Cut to Mushrooms
In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in  a bower made by a
living tree  with branches laced  and drooping to the ground; his bed was of
fern and grass,  deep and soft  and  strangely fragrant. The sun was shining
through  the fluttering leaves,  which were still green  upon the  tree.  He
jumped up and went out.
Sam  was  sitting  on the grass near the  edge  of the wood. Pippin was
standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves.
'They have left us fruit  and drink, and bread,' said Pippin. 'Come and
have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I
did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.'
Frodo  sat  down  beside  Sam and began  to eat. 'What is the  plan for
today?' asked Pippin.
'To  walk  to Bucklebury as  quickly as possible,'  answered Frodo, and
gave his attention to the food.
'Do you think  we shall see  anything  of  those Riders?' asked  Pippin
cheerfully. Under  the  morning  sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of
them did not seem very alarming to him.
'Yes, probably,' said Frodo, not liking  the reminder. 'But  I  hope to
get across the river without their seeing us.'
'Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?'
'Not much - only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you ask
about the sniffing?'
'We didn't discuss it,' said Frodo with his mouth full.
'You should have. I am sure it is very important.'
'In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused  to explain it,' said
Frodo sharply. 'And now leave me in peace  for a bit! I don't want to answer
a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!'
'Good heavens!' said Pippin. 'At breakfast?' He walked away towards the
edge of the green.
From Frodo's mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought
- had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the words of Gildor.
The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was running  on the green turf and
singing.
'No!  I could  not!' he said  to  himself.  'It is one thing to take my
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary,
and food  and  bed are  sweet.  To  take them into exile,  where  hunger and
weariness may have  no cure,  is quite another - even if they are willing to
come. The inheritance  is mine  alone.  I don't think I  ought  even to take
Sam.' He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him.
'Well, Sam!' he said. 'What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon as
ever I  can - in fact I  have made up my mind now not even to wait  a day at
Crickhollow, if it can be helped.'
'Very good, sir!'
'You still mean to come with me?'
'I do.'
'It  is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Most
likely neither of us will come back.'
'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam.
'Don't you leave him!       they said to me.     Leave him!      I said.  I never mean to. I
am  going  with  him, if  he climbs to the Moon,  and if  any of those Black
Rulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with,                    I said. They
laughed.'
'Who are   they,  and what are you talking about?'
'The  Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and  they seemed to know
you were going away, so I didn't see the use of denying  it. Wonderful folk,
Elves, sir! Wonderful!'
'They are,' said Frodo.  'Do you like  them still,  now  you have had a
closer view?'
'They  seem a bit above my likes and dislikes,  so  to speak,' answered
Sam slowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite
different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it
were.'
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward
sign of the odd change that seemed  to have come  over him. It did not sound
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he  knew. But it looked
like the old  Sam Gamgee sitting  there, except that  his face was unusually
thoughtful.
'Do  you feel any  need to  leave the Shire now - now that your wish to
see them has come true already?' he asked.
'Yes,  sir. I  don't  know how to  say it, but after last night  I feel
