never! No, precious, no!'
`Are you satisfied? ' said Faramir.
`Yes,' said Frodo.  'At least, you must  either  accept this promise or
carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came  to
me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.'
Faramir sat for a moment in thought. `Very good,' he  said at last.  `I
surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he
will do with you! '
'But, Lord Faramir,' said Frodo bowing, `you have not yet declared your
will  concerning  the said Frodo, and until  that is  made known, he  cannot
shape his plans for himself  or his companions. Your judgement was postponed
until the morning; but that is now at hand.'
`Then I  will declare my doom,' said Faramir. `As for you, Frodo, in so
far as lies in me under higher  authority, I declare you  free in  the realm
of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you
nor any that go with you have leave to come  to  this  place unbidden.  This
doom  shall  stand for a  year and a day, and  then cease,  unless you shall
before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to  the  Lord and
Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and
to make  it  lifelong.  In the  meantime,  whomsoever  you  take  under your
protection shall be under my protection  and under the shield of Gondor. Are
you answered? '
Frodo bowed low. 'I am answered,' he  said, `and I place myself at your
service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.'
`It is  of  great  worth,' said  Faramir.  'And  now, do you  take this
creature, this Smjagol, under your protection? '
`I  do  take  Smjagol under  my  protection,' said  Frodo.  Sam  sighed
audibly;  and  not  at  the courtesies, of which, as  any  hobbit  would, he
thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a
great many more words and bows.
'Then I say  to you,' said Faramir, turning to  Gollum, 'you  are under
doom of  death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet
if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall
fall. And may death find  you swiftly, within Gondor or  without,  if you do
not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his
guide,
he says. Whither were you leading him? ' Gollum made no reply.
`This I will not  have secret,'  said Faramir. `Answer me,  or  I  will
reverse my judgement! ' Still Gollum did not answer.
`I will answer for him,' said Frodo. `He brought  me to the Black Gate,
as I asked; but it was impassable.'
`There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,' said Faramir.
`Seeing this, we  turned aside and came by  the Southward road '  Frodo
continued; 'for he said that there is, or there may be, a path near to Minas
Ithil.'
`Minas Morgul,' said Faramir.
`I do not know clearly,' said Frodo; `but the path  climbs, I think, up
into  the mountains  on the  northern side of that vale  where  the old city
stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to -- that which is beyond.'
`Do you know the name of that high pass? ' said Faramir.
'No,' said Frodo.
'It is  called Cirith Ungol.' Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering
to himself. `Is not that its name? ' said Faramir turning to him.
`No! '  said  Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had stabbed
him. 'Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the name matter to us?
Master  says he must get in. So we must try some way. There is no  other way
to try, no.'
'No  other way?  ' said  Faramir. `How do  you  know  that? And who has
explored  all  the  confines  of  that  dark  realm? '  He  looked long  and
thoughtfully at Gollum. Presently he spoke  again. `Take this creature away,
Anborn. Treat  him gently, but watch  him.  And do not you,  Smjagol, try to
dive into the falls.  The rocks  have such  teeth  there  as would  slay you
before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! '
Anborn  went out  and Gollum went cringing before him.  The curtain was
drawn across the recess.
`Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,' said Faramir.  `I do not
think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.'
'No, not altogether wicked,' said Frodo.
'Not wholly, perhaps,' said Faramir; 'but malice eats it like a canker,
and the  evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with
him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to  any  point on the borders
of Gondor that he may name.'
`He would not take  it,' said  Frodo.  'He would  follow after me as he
long  has  done.  And I  have  promised  many  times  to  take him under  my
protection  and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with
him?'
'No,'  said  Faramir. `But my  heart would. For it  seems less  evil to
counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if  one
sees a friend bound unwitting to his own  harm. But no -- if he will go with
you, you must  now endure him. But I do not think  you are  holden to go  to
Cirith  Ungol, of which  he has told you  less than  he  knows. That much  I
perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!'
`Where then shall  I  go?  ' said  Frodo.  `Back  to the Black Gate and
deliver  myself  up  to the guard? What do  you know against this place that
makes its name so dreadful? '
`Nothing certain,' said Faramir. 'We of Gondor do not ever pass east of
the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever done so, nor has
any  of us  set foot upon the  Mountains of Shadow. Of them we know only old
report and the  rumour of bygone  days. But there  is some  dark terror that
dwells in the  passes above Minas Morgul. If Cirith Ungol  is named, old men
and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent.
,The valley  of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was
a menace  and  a  dread while the banished  Enemy dwelt  yet far  away,  and
Ithilien was still for the most part in our keeping.  As you know, that city
was once a strong place, proud and fair, Minas Ithil, the twin sister of our
own city.  But it was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in his first strength
had dominated, and who wandered homeless and masterless  after his fall.  It
is said  that  their lords  were  men of  N®menor  who had fallen  into dark
wickedness; to them the Enemy had  given rings of power, and he had
devoured
them: living ghosts  they were become, terrible  and  evil. After  his going
they took Minas  Ithil and  dwelt  there,  and they  filled  it, and all the
valley about, with decay: it seemed empty  and was  not so,  for a shapeless
fear  lived  within the ruined walls. Nine Lords there  were, and after  the
return  of their Master, which they aided and prepared  in secret, they grew
strong again.  Then the Nine Riders issued forth from  the  gates of horror,
and we could not withstand them. Do not approach their  citadel. You will be
espied. It  is a place of  sleepless malice, full of lidless eyes. Do not go
that way! '
'But where else will you direct me? ' said Frodo. 'You cannot yourself,
you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over  them. But over the mountains I
