protection  and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with
him?'
'No,'  said  Faramir. `But my  heart would. For it  seems less  evil to
counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if  one
sees a friend bound unwitting to his own  harm. But no -- if he will go with
you, you must  now endure him. But I do not think  you are  holden to go  to
Cirith  Ungol, of which  he has told you  less than  he  knows. That much  I
perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!'
`Where then shall  I  go?  ' said  Frodo.  `Back  to the Black Gate and
deliver  myself  up  to the guard? What do  you know against this place that
makes its name so dreadful? '
`Nothing certain,' said Faramir. 'We of Gondor do not ever pass east of
the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever done so, nor has
any  of us  set foot upon the  Mountains of Shadow. Of them we know only old
report and the  rumour of bygone  days. But there  is some  dark terror that
dwells in the  passes above Minas Morgul. If Cirith Ungol  is named, old men
and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent.
,The valley  of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was
a menace  and  a  dread while the banished  Enemy dwelt  yet far  away,  and
Ithilien was still for the most part in our keeping.  As you know, that city
was once a strong place, proud and fair, Minas Ithil, the twin sister of our
own city.  But it was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in his first strength
had dominated, and who wandered homeless and masterless  after his fall.  It
is said  that  their lords  were  men of  N®menor  who had fallen  into dark
wickedness; to them the Enemy had  given rings of power, and he had
devoured
them: living ghosts  they were become, terrible  and  evil. After  his going
they took Minas  Ithil and  dwelt  there,  and they  filled  it, and all the
valley about, with decay: it seemed empty  and was  not so,  for a shapeless
fear  lived  within the ruined walls. Nine Lords there  were, and after  the
return  of their Master, which they aided and prepared  in secret, they grew
strong again.  Then the Nine Riders issued forth from  the  gates of horror,
and we could not withstand them. Do not approach their  citadel. You will be
espied. It  is a place of  sleepless malice, full of lidless eyes. Do not go
that way! '
'But where else will you direct me? ' said Frodo. 'You cannot yourself,
you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over  them. But over the mountains I
am bound, by solemn  undertaking to the  Council, to find a way or perish in
the seeking. And if  I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where
then  shall I go  among Elves or Men? Would you have  me come to Gondor
with
this Thing, the Thing  that drove your  brother mad with  desire? What spell
would it work in Minas Tirith?  Shall  there be two  cities of Minas Morgul,
grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? '
`I would not have it so,' said Faramir.
`Then what would you have me do? '
`I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment. And I
do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.'
'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find.  And there
is no time for long searching,' said Frodo.
`It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,'  said  Faramir.  'But at the
least,  remember my  warning:  beware  of this guide,  Smjagol.  He has done
murder before now. I read it in him.' He sighed.
`Well, so we meet and  part,  Frodo son of Drogo. You have no  need  of
soft words: I do  not hope to see you again on any other day under this Sun.
But you shall go  now with my blessing upon you,  and upon  all your people.
Rest a little while food is prepared for you.
'I would gladly learn how this creeping Smjagol became possessed of the
Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not trouble you now.
If ever beyond  hope you return to the lands of the living and we retell our
tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at  old  grief, you shall tell
me  then.  Until  that  time, or some  other time beyond the vision  of  the
Seeing-stones of N®menor, farewell! '
He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed out into
the cave.
Chapter 7. Journey to the Cross-roads
Frodo and Sam returned  to their  beds and lay there in silence resting
for a little,  while men bestirred themselves  and  the business of the  day
began. After a while water was brought to them,  and then they were led to a
table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his fast with them. He had
not slept since the battle on the day before, yet he did not look weary.
When they had finished they stood up. `May no hunger trouble you on the
road,'  said  Faramir. `You  have little provision, but some small  store of
food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed  in your packs. You will
have  no lack  of  water as you walk in Ithilien,  but  do not  drink of any
stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I
must tell you. My scouts and watchers have all returned, even some that have
crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find  a strange thing. The land
is empty.  Nothing  is  on the  road,  and  no sound  of foot, or  horn,  or
bowstring is anywhere  to be  heard.  A  waiting  silence broods  above  the
Nameless Land.  I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly
to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If  you are
ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.'
The hobbits' packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had
been), and  also two stout staves of polished wood, shod with iron, and with
carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs.
'I  have no fitting  gifts  to  give you at our parting,' said Faramir;
`but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in
the wild.  The  men of  the White Mountains use them; though these have been
cut  down to your  height and  newly  shod. They  are made of the fair  tree
lebethron    , beloved of  the woodwrights of Gondor, and a  virtue has been set
upon them of finding  and returning.  May that virtue not wholly  fail under
the Shadow into which you go!'
The hobbits  bowed low. `Most  gracious host,' said Frodo, 'it was said
to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret
and unlooked  for. Certainly I looked  for no such  friendship  as you  have
shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.'
Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or
hiding-hole,  and he seemed  better pleased with himself  than he had  been,
