Chapter 7. Journey to the Cross-roads
Frodo and Sam returned  to their  beds and lay there in silence resting
for a little,  while men bestirred themselves  and  the business of the  day
began. After a while water was brought to them,  and then they were led to a
table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his fast with them. He had
not slept since the battle on the day before, yet he did not look weary.
When they had finished they stood up. `May no hunger trouble you on the
road,'  said  Faramir. `You  have little provision, but some small  store of
food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed  in your packs. You will
have  no lack  of  water as you walk in Ithilien,  but  do not  drink of any
stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I
must tell you. My scouts and watchers have all returned, even some that have
crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find  a strange thing. The land
is empty.  Nothing  is  on the  road,  and  no sound  of foot, or  horn,  or
bowstring is anywhere  to be  heard.  A  waiting  silence broods  above  the
Nameless Land.  I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly
to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If  you are
ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.'
The hobbits' packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had
been), and  also two stout staves of polished wood, shod with iron, and with
carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs.
'I  have no fitting  gifts  to  give you at our parting,' said Faramir;
`but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in
the wild.  The  men of  the White Mountains use them; though these have been
cut  down to your  height and  newly  shod. They  are made of the fair  tree
lebethron    , beloved of  the woodwrights of Gondor, and a  virtue has been set
upon them of finding  and returning.  May that virtue not wholly  fail under
the Shadow into which you go!'
The hobbits  bowed low. `Most  gracious host,' said Frodo, 'it was said
to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret
and unlooked  for. Certainly I looked  for no such  friendship  as you  have
shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.'
Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or
hiding-hole,  and he seemed  better pleased with himself  than he had  been,
though he kept close to Frodo and avoided the glance of Faramir.
'Your  guide  must  be  blindfolded,' said Faramir, 'but  you and  your
servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.'
Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when they came to
bind his eyes; and Frodo said: 'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes
first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm  is meant.' This  was done,
and they were led from the cave of Henneth Annyn. After they  had passed the
passages  and stairs they felt the cool morning air, fresh and sweet,  about
them. Still blind they went on for  some  little time,  up  and  then gently
down. At last the voice of Faramir ordered them to be uncovered.
They stood under the boughs  of the woods again. No noise  of the falls
could be heard,  for  a  long  southward slope lay now  between them and the
ravine in which the stream flowed. To the west they could  see light through
the trees, as if the  world came there  to a sudden end, at a  brink looking
out only on to sky.
'Here  is the last parting of our ways,' said Faramir. 'If you take  my
counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go  straight on, for  thus you will
have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where
the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes
in  long  hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In
the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land
dreams in  a false peace, and  for a while  all evil is  withdrawn. Fare you
well, while you may!'
He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people, stooping,
and placing his hands upon their shoulders, and kissing their foreheads. 'Go
with the good will of all good men!' he said.
They bowed to the ground. Then he  turned and without  looking back  he
left them  and went to his  two guards that stood at a little distance away.
They marvelled  to  see  with  what speed  these green-clad men  now  moved,
vanishing almost in the twinkling of an  eye.  The forest  where Faramir had
stood seemed empty and drear, as if a dream had passed.
Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to  mark his disregard of
all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the foot of a tree.
`Hungry again already?' thought Sam. `Well, now for it again!'
'Have they  gone at last? ' said Gollum. `Nassty wicked Men!  Smjagol's
neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let's go! '
`Yes, let  us go,' said Frodo. `But  if you can only speak ill of those
who showed you mercy, keep silent! '
`Nice Master! ' said Gollum. `Smjagol was only joking. Always forgives,
he  does, yes, yes, even nice Master's little trickses. Oh yes, nice Master,
nice Smjagol! '
Frodo and Sam did not  answer.  Hoisting their packs and  taking  their
staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien.
Twice that day they  rested  and took a little of the food provided  by
Faramir:  dried fruits and  salted  meat, enough for  many  days;  and bread
enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing.
The sun rose and  passed  overhead unseen, and began to sink,  and  the
light through  the trees to the west grew golden; and always they  walked in
cool green  shadow, and all about  them was silence. The birds seemed all to
have flown away or to have fallen dumb.
Darkness came early  to the silent  woods, and before the fall of night
they halted, weary, for they had walked  seven leagues or more  from Henneth
Annyn. Frodo lay and  slept  away  the  night  on the  deep mould beneath an
ancient tree. Sam beside  him was more uneasy: he woke many times, but there
was never a sign of Gollum, who had slipped off as  soon as  the others  had
settled to rest. Whether he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had
wandered  restlessly prowling through  the  night, he did  not say;  but  he
returned with the first glimmer of light, and roused his companions.
`Must get up, yes  they must!'  he  said. 'Long ways to go still, south
and east. Hobbits must make haste!'
That day passed  much  as the  day  before had  gone,  except that  the
silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be stifling under
the trees. It felt as if thunder was  brewing. Gollum often paused, sniffing
the air, and then he would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.
As the third stage of  their day's  march drew on  and afternoon waned,
the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and more scattered. Great
ilexes of  huge girth stood  dark  and solemn in  wide glades with  here and
there among  them  hoary ash-trees. and  giant oaks  just putting  out their
brown-green  buds.  About them  lay long launds of green  grass dappled with
celandine and anemones, white and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were
acres  populous with  the leaves of  woodland hyacinths: already their sleek
bell-stems were  thrusting through the  mould. No  living creature, beast or
bird, was to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and  they
walked now with caution, flitting from one long shadow to another.
