who showed you mercy, keep silent! '
`Nice Master! ' said Gollum. `Smjagol was only joking. Always forgives,
he  does, yes, yes, even nice Master's little trickses. Oh yes, nice Master,
nice Smjagol! '
Frodo and Sam did not  answer.  Hoisting their packs and  taking  their
staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien.
Twice that day they  rested  and took a little of the food provided  by
Faramir:  dried fruits and  salted  meat, enough for  many  days;  and bread
enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing.
The sun rose and  passed  overhead unseen, and began to sink,  and  the
light through  the trees to the west grew golden; and always they  walked in
cool green  shadow, and all about  them was silence. The birds seemed all to
have flown away or to have fallen dumb.
Darkness came early  to the silent  woods, and before the fall of night
they halted, weary, for they had walked  seven leagues or more  from Henneth
Annyn. Frodo lay and  slept  away  the  night  on the  deep mould beneath an
ancient tree. Sam beside  him was more uneasy: he woke many times, but there
was never a sign of Gollum, who had slipped off as  soon as  the others  had
settled to rest. Whether he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had
wandered  restlessly prowling through  the  night, he did  not say;  but  he
returned with the first glimmer of light, and roused his companions.
`Must get up, yes  they must!'  he  said. 'Long ways to go still, south
and east. Hobbits must make haste!'
That day passed  much  as the  day  before had  gone,  except that  the
silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be stifling under
the trees. It felt as if thunder was  brewing. Gollum often paused, sniffing
the air, and then he would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.
As the third stage of  their day's  march drew on  and afternoon waned,
the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and more scattered. Great
ilexes of  huge girth stood  dark  and solemn in  wide glades with  here and
there among  them  hoary ash-trees. and  giant oaks  just putting  out their
brown-green  buds.  About them  lay long launds of green  grass dappled with
celandine and anemones, white and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were
acres  populous with  the leaves of  woodland hyacinths: already their sleek
bell-stems were  thrusting through the  mould. No  living creature, beast or
bird, was to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and  they
walked now with caution, flitting from one long shadow to another.
Light  was fading fast when they came to the forest-end. There they sat
under  an old gnarled oak that  sent its roots twisting like snakes  down  a
steep crumbling bank. A deep dim valley lay before them. On its further side
the  woods gathered  again,  blue  and grey under  the  sullen  evening, and
marched on southwards. To the  right the Mountains of Gondor  glowed,
remote
in  the  West,  under  a fire-flecked  sky. To  the left  lay darkness:  the
towering walls of Mordor;  and  out of  that darkness the long valley  came,
falling steeply in an ever-widening trough towards the Anduin. At its bottom
ran a hurrying stream:  Frodo could  hear its stony voice coming  up through
the silence; and beside  it on the hither side a road went winding down like
a pale ribbon, down into chill grey mists that  no  gleam of sunset touched.
There it seemed to  Frodo that he descried far off, floating as it were on a
shadowy sea, the high  dim  tops and broken pinnacles of old  towers forlorn
and dark.
He turned to Gollum. `Do you know where we are? ' he said.
'Yes,  Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower of the
Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the River. The ruined
city, yes, very nasty place, full of  enemies. We shouldn't have taken Men's
advice. Hobbits have come a long way out of the path. Must go east now, away
up there.' He waved his skinny arm  towards  the darkling mountains. `And we
can't  use  this  road. Oh  no!  Cruel peoples come this way, down  from the
Tower.'
Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving  on it
now. It appeared lonely  and forsaken, running  down to empty  ruins  in the
mist. But there was an evil feeling in the air, as if things might indeed be
passing up and down that  eyes could  not see. Frodo shuddered  as he looked
again  at the distant pinnacles now dwindling into  night, and the  sound of
the water  seemed  cold  and cruel: the voice  of Morgulduin,  the  polluted
stream that flowed from the Valley of the Wraiths.
'What shall we do?  ' he said.  'We have walked long  and far. Shall we
look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden? '
'No good  hiding in the  dark,' said Gollum. 'It's in day that  hobbits
must hide now, yes in day.'
`Oh come! ' said Sam.  'We must rest for a bit, even if we get up again
in the middle of the night. There'll still be hours of dark then time enough
for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.'
Gollum  reluctantly agreed  to  this, and  he  turned  back towards the
trees, working eastward for a  while along the straggling edges of the wood.
He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and after some debate
they  all climbed  up into  the  crotch of  a  large  holm-oak, whose  thick
branches springing together from  the trunk made a good  hiding-place and  a
fairly comfortable refuge.  Night fell and it grew altogether dark under the
canopy of the  tree.  Frodo and Sam drank a  little water and ate some bread
and dried fruit, but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits
did not shut their eyes.
It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly
they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them. He  listened and
sniffed,  which seemed,  as  they had noticed before,  his  usual method  of
discovering the time of night.
'Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?' he said. 'Let's go!'
'We aren't, and we haven't,' growled Sam. 'But we'll go if we must.'
Gollum dropped at once  from  the branches of the tree on to all fours,
and the hobbits followed more slowly.
As  soon  as they  were down they  went  on again  with Gollum leading,
eastwards, up the  dark sloping  land. They could see little,  for the night
was  now so deep that  they were  hardly aware of the  stems of trees before
they stumbled  against them. The ground  became more broken  and walking
was
more  difficult, but Gollum seemed in no  way troubled. He  led them through
thickets and wastes of brambles; sometimes round  the lip of a deep cleft or
dark pit, sometimes down into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but
if ever they went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and
steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their first  halt they looked back,
and they could  dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they  had left behind
lying like  a  vast  dense shadow, a darker night under the  dark blank sky.
There seemed to be a great  blackness looming slowly out of the East, eating
up the faint blurred stars. Later the sinking moon escaped from the pursuing
cloud, but it was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare.
At last  Gollum  turned  to the hobbits. 'Day soon,' he  said. 'Hobbits
must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste! '
He quickened his pace, and they  followed him wearily.  Soon they began
to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part it was covered
with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and  low tough thorns, though
