Gollum  reluctantly agreed  to  this, and  he  turned  back towards the
trees, working eastward for a  while along the straggling edges of the wood.
He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and after some debate
they  all climbed  up into  the  crotch of  a  large  holm-oak, whose  thick
branches springing together from  the trunk made a good  hiding-place and  a
fairly comfortable refuge.  Night fell and it grew altogether dark under the
canopy of the  tree.  Frodo and Sam drank a  little water and ate some bread
and dried fruit, but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits
did not shut their eyes.
It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly
they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them. He  listened and
sniffed,  which seemed,  as  they had noticed before,  his  usual method  of
discovering the time of night.
'Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?' he said. 'Let's go!'
'We aren't, and we haven't,' growled Sam. 'But we'll go if we must.'
Gollum dropped at once  from  the branches of the tree on to all fours,
and the hobbits followed more slowly.
As  soon  as they  were down they  went  on again  with Gollum leading,
eastwards, up the  dark sloping  land. They could see little,  for the night
was  now so deep that  they were  hardly aware of the  stems of trees before
they stumbled  against them. The ground  became more broken  and walking
was
more  difficult, but Gollum seemed in no  way troubled. He  led them through
thickets and wastes of brambles; sometimes round  the lip of a deep cleft or
dark pit, sometimes down into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but
if ever they went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and
steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their first  halt they looked back,
and they could  dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they  had left behind
lying like  a  vast  dense shadow, a darker night under the  dark blank sky.
There seemed to be a great  blackness looming slowly out of the East, eating
up the faint blurred stars. Later the sinking moon escaped from the pursuing
cloud, but it was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare.
At last  Gollum  turned  to the hobbits. 'Day soon,' he  said. 'Hobbits
must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste! '
He quickened his pace, and they  followed him wearily.  Soon they began
to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part it was covered
with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and  low tough thorns, though
here and there clearings opened, the scars of recent fires. The gorse-bushes
became  more frequent  as they  got nearer the  top; very old and  tall they
were, gaunt and leggy below but thick above, and already  putting out yellow
flowers  that  glimmered in the gloom and gave a faint  sweet scent. So tall
were the spiny  thickets that the  hobbits could  walk upright  under  them,
passing through long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould.
On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march and
crawled for hiding  underneath a  tangled  knot  of  thorns.  Their  twisted
boughs, stooping to the ground, were overridden  by a clambering maze of old
briars. Deep inside there  was  a hollow hall, raftered with dead branch and
bramble, and roofed with the first leaves and  shoots  of spring. There they
lay for a  while, too tired yet to eat; and peering out through the holes in
the covert they watched for the slow growth of day.
But no  day  came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East  there was a
dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it  was not the red of dawn. Across
the tumbled lands between, the mountains of the Ephel D®ath frowned at
them,
black and shapeless below where night lay thick and did not pass away, above
with  jagged  tops  and edges outlined  hard and  menacing against the fiery
glow. Away to their right a great shoulder of the mountains  stood out, dark
and black amid the shadows, thrusting westward.
`Which way do we go from here?' asked Frodo. `Is that the opening of-of
the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass?'
`Need we think about it yet?' said Sam, `Surely we're not going to move
any more today, if day it is?'
`Perhaps not, perhaps not,' said Gollum.  `But we must go soon, to  the
Cross-roads.  Yes,  to  the  Cross-roads. That's the  way  over  there  yes,
Master.'
The red glare over Mordor  died  away. The twilight deepened  as  great
vapours rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and Sam took a little
food and then  lay down,  but Gollum was restless.  He would  not eat any of
their food, but  he  drank  a little water and  then crawled about under the
bushes, sniffing and muttering. Then. suddenly he disappeared.
`Off hunting, I suppose,' said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to sleep
first, and  he  was soon deep in a dream. He thought he was back in the  Bag
End garden looking for something; but he had a heavy pack on his back, which
made him stoop.  It  all seemed very weedy and rank  somehow, and thorns and
bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge.
`A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired,' he kept on saying.
Presently  he remembered what he was looking  for. `My  pipe!'  he said, and
with that he woke up.
`Silly!' he said  to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he
was lying  down under the hedge. `It's in  your pack all the time!'  Then he
realized, first that the pipe might  be in his pack but he had  no leaf, and
next that he was hundreds of miles from  Bag End. He sat up. It seemed to be
almost dark. Why had his master let him sleep  on out of turn, right on till
evening?
`Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'What's the time? Seems
to be getting late!'
'No it isn't,' said Frodo.  `But  the day is getting darker instead  of
lighter: darker and  darker. As far as I  can tell, it isn't midday yet, and
you've only slept for about three hours.'
'I wonder what's up,' said  Sam. 'Is there  a storm coming? If  so it's
going  to  be the  worst there ever was. We shall  wish  we were down a deep
hole, not just stuck  under a hedge.' He listened. `What's that? Thunder, or
drums, or what is it? '
'I don't know,' said  Frodo. `It's been going on for a good while  now.
Sometimes the ground seems  to  tremble, sometimes it seems to be  the heavy
air throbbing in your ears.'
Sam looked  round.  `Where's Gollum?  ' he said. 'Hasn't he  come  back
yet?'
`No,' said Frodo. `There's not been a sign or sound of him.'
`Well,  I  can't abide  him,'  said  Sam.  `In fact,  I've  never taken
anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose  on the way. But
it  would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to go and get lost
now, just when we shall need him most --  that is, if he's ever going  to be
any use, which I doubt.'
`You forget the Marshes,' said Frodo.  `I hope nothing has happened  to
him.'
`And I hope he's  up to  no  tricks. And anyway I  hope he doesn't fall
into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we  shall soon be in
for trouble.'
At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now
and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. 'I think we are in
