bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge.
`A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired,' he kept on saying.
Presently  he remembered what he was looking  for. `My  pipe!'  he said, and
with that he woke up.
`Silly!' he said  to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he
was lying  down under the hedge. `It's in  your pack all the time!'  Then he
realized, first that the pipe might  be in his pack but he had  no leaf, and
next that he was hundreds of miles from  Bag End. He sat up. It seemed to be
almost dark. Why had his master let him sleep  on out of turn, right on till
evening?
`Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'What's the time? Seems
to be getting late!'
'No it isn't,' said Frodo.  `But  the day is getting darker instead  of
lighter: darker and  darker. As far as I  can tell, it isn't midday yet, and
you've only slept for about three hours.'
'I wonder what's up,' said  Sam. 'Is there  a storm coming? If  so it's
going  to  be the  worst there ever was. We shall  wish  we were down a deep
hole, not just stuck  under a hedge.' He listened. `What's that? Thunder, or
drums, or what is it? '
'I don't know,' said  Frodo. `It's been going on for a good while  now.
Sometimes the ground seems  to  tremble, sometimes it seems to be  the heavy
air throbbing in your ears.'
Sam looked  round.  `Where's Gollum?  ' he said. 'Hasn't he  come  back
yet?'
`No,' said Frodo. `There's not been a sign or sound of him.'
`Well,  I  can't abide  him,'  said  Sam.  `In fact,  I've  never taken
anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose  on the way. But
it  would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to go and get lost
now, just when we shall need him most --  that is, if he's ever going  to be
any use, which I doubt.'
`You forget the Marshes,' said Frodo.  `I hope nothing has happened  to
him.'
`And I hope he's  up to  no  tricks. And anyway I  hope he doesn't fall
into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we  shall soon be in
for trouble.'
At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now
and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. 'I think we are in
for trouble anyhow,' said Frodo. `I'm  afraid our journey  is  drawing to an
end.'
'Maybe,' said Sam;  `but        where there's life there's hope       , as my Gaffer
used to say;     and need of vittles    , as he  mostways used to  add. You  have a
bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.'
The  afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out
from the  covert he  could see only a dun, shadowless  world,  fading slowly
into a featureless,  colourless gloom.  It felt stifling but not warm. Frodo
slept  unquietly,  turning and  tossing,  and sometimes murmuring. Twice Sam
thought  he heard him speaking  Gandalf's  name.  The  time  seemed  to drag
interminably. Suddenly Sam heard a hiss behind him, and  there was Gollum
on
all fours, peering at them with gleaming eyes.
`Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!' he whispered. `Wake up!  No time
to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to lose!'
Sam stared  at him suspiciously: he  seemed frightened or excited.  `Go
now? What's your little game?  It isn't time yet. It can't be tea-time even,
leastways not in decent places where there is tea-time.'
`Silly!  ' hissed Gollum. `We're not in  decent places.  Time's running
short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake up. Master, wake
u He clawed at Frodo; and  Frodo, startled out of sleep, sat up suddenly and
seized him by the arm. Gollum tore himself loose and backed away.
'They mustn't  be silly,' he hissed. `We must go. No time to lose!' And
nothing more could  they  get  out of him. Where he  had been, and  what  he
thought was brewing to make  him in  such a hurry, he would not say. Sam was
filled with deep suspicion,  and showed it; but  Frodo gave no sign  of what
was passing in his mind. He sighed, hoisted his pack, and prepared to go out
into the ever-gathering darkness.
Very stealthily  Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under cover
wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the ground, across any
open space; but the light was now so dim that even  a keen-eyed beast of the
wild could scarcely have seen the hobbits, hooded, in their grey cloaks, nor
heard them, walking as warily as the little people can. Without the crack of
a twig or the rustle of a leaf they passed and vanished.
For about an hour they went on, silently, in  single file, oppressed by
the gloom and by the  absolute stillness  of the land,  broken only now  and
again  by the  faint rumbling as  of thunder far away or  drum-beats in some
hollow  of  the hills.  Down  from their hiding-place  they  went,  and then
turning  south they steered as straight a course as Gollum could find across
a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains. Presently, not far
ahead, looming up  like a black wall, they saw a belt of trees. As they drew
nearer they  became aware  that  these were of vast  size,  very  ancient it
seemed, and still towering high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as
if tempest and lightning-blast had swept across them, but had failed to kill
them or to shake their fathomless roots.
'The Cross-roads, yes,' whispered Gollum, the first words that had been
spoken  since they left  their hiding-place. 'We must go  that way.' Turning
eastward  now, he led them up  the slope;  and  then suddenly  there  it was
before them: the Southward Road, winding its way about the outer feet of the
mountains, until presently it plunged into the great ring of trees.
'This is the only way,' whispered Gollum. 'No paths beyond the road. No
paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be silent! '
As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they crept
down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under the stony bank,
grey as the stones themselves,  and soft-footed  as hunting cats.  At length
they reached the trees, and found that they stood in a great  roofless ring,
open in  the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between  their immense
boles  were  like the great  dark arches of  some  ruined  hall. In the very
centre four ways met. Behind them lay the road to the  Morannon; before them
it ran out again upon its  long journey south; to their right the road  from
old  Osgiliath  came  climbing up,  and crossing,  passed out eastward  into
darkness: the fourth way, the road they were to take.
Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a
light was shining;  he  saw it  glowing  on  Sam's face beside  him. Turning
towards it, he saw, beyond an arch of boughs, the road to  Osgiliath running
almost as straight  as  a stretched ribbon down, down, into the West. There,
far away, beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade,  the  Sun was
sinking,
finding at last the hem of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling
in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a
huge sitting  figure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath.
The years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was gone,
and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone, rudely painted
by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in
