hollow  of  the hills.  Down  from their hiding-place  they  went,  and then
turning  south they steered as straight a course as Gollum could find across
a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains. Presently, not far
ahead, looming up  like a black wall, they saw a belt of trees. As they drew
nearer they  became aware  that  these were of vast  size,  very  ancient it
seemed, and still towering high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as
if tempest and lightning-blast had swept across them, but had failed to kill
them or to shake their fathomless roots.
'The Cross-roads, yes,' whispered Gollum, the first words that had been
spoken  since they left  their hiding-place. 'We must go  that way.' Turning
eastward  now, he led them up  the slope;  and  then suddenly  there  it was
before them: the Southward Road, winding its way about the outer feet of the
mountains, until presently it plunged into the great ring of trees.
'This is the only way,' whispered Gollum. 'No paths beyond the road. No
paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be silent! '
As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they crept
down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under the stony bank,
grey as the stones themselves,  and soft-footed  as hunting cats.  At length
they reached the trees, and found that they stood in a great  roofless ring,
open in  the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between  their immense
boles  were  like the great  dark arches of  some  ruined  hall. In the very
centre four ways met. Behind them lay the road to the  Morannon; before them
it ran out again upon its  long journey south; to their right the road  from
old  Osgiliath  came  climbing up,  and crossing,  passed out eastward  into
darkness: the fourth way, the road they were to take.
Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a
light was shining;  he  saw it  glowing  on  Sam's face beside  him. Turning
towards it, he saw, beyond an arch of boughs, the road to  Osgiliath running
almost as straight  as  a stretched ribbon down, down, into the West. There,
far away, beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade,  the  Sun was
sinking,
finding at last the hem of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling
in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a
huge sitting  figure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath.
The years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was gone,
and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone, rudely painted
by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in
the midst  of  its forehead. Upon its knees and mighty chair,  and all about
the pedestal,  were idle  scrawls  mixed  with  the foul  symbols  that  the
maggot-folk of Mordor used.
Suddenly, caught by the level beams,  Frodo saw the old king's head: it
was lying rolled away by the  roadside. `Look, Sam!' he cried, startled into
speech. `Look! The king has got a crown again!'
The eyes  were hollow and the  carven  beard was  broken, but about the
high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A trailing plant
with flowers like small white stars had bound  itself across the brows as if
in reverence for the fallen king,  and in the crevices  of  his  stony  hair
yellow stonecrop gleamed.
'They cannot conquer for ever!' said Frodo. And then suddenly the brief
glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and  as if at the  shuttering
of a lamp, black night fell.
Chapter 8. The Stairs of Cirith Ungol
Gollum  was  tugging  at  Frodo's  cloak  and  hissing  with  fear  and
impatience. `We must go,' he said. `We mustn't stand here. Make haste!'
Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide
led  him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the ring of trees and
crept along the road towards the mountains. This road, too, ran straight for
a while,  but  soon it began to  bend  away southwards,  until it came right
under the great shoulder of rock that they had seen from the distance. Black
and  forbidding  it  loomed  above them, darker  than the  dark  sky behind.
Crawling  under  its shadow the road  went on,  and rounding it sprang  east
again and began to climb steeply.
Frodo and Sam were  plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to
care greatly  about  their  peril. Frodo's head  was  bowed; his burden  was
dragging him down again. As soon as the great  Cross-roads  had been passed,
the weight of it, almost forgotten in Ithilien, had begun to grow once more.
Now, feeling the way become steep before his feet, he looked wearily up; and
then he  saw  it, even  as Gollum  had said  that he would: the city of  the
Ringwraiths. He cowered against the stony bank.
A long-tilted  valley, a  deep gulf of shadow,  ran back far  into  the
mountains. Upon the further side, some way  within the valley's arms high on
a  rocky seat upon the black knees  of  the Ephel D®ath, stood the walls and
tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and sky, but it  was lit
with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of
Minas  Ithil long ago, Tower of the  Moon, fair and radiant in the hollow of
the hills. Paler  indeed than  the moon ailing in some  slow eclipse was the
light of it now, wavering and blowing like a  noisome exhalation of decay, a
corpse-light, a light that  illuminated  nothing.  In  the  walls  and tower
windows showed, like countless black holes  looking inward  into  emptiness;
but  the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly, first one way and then
another, a huge ghostly head  leering into the night. For a moment the three
companions  stood there, shrinking,  staring  up with unwilling eyes. Gollum
was the first to recover. Again he pulled  at their cloaks urgently,  but he
spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step was reluctant, and
time seemed to slow its pace. so that between the raising of a foot  and the
