Chapter 8. The Stairs of Cirith Ungol
Gollum  was  tugging  at  Frodo's  cloak  and  hissing  with  fear  and
impatience. `We must go,' he said. `We mustn't stand here. Make haste!'
Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide
led  him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the ring of trees and
crept along the road towards the mountains. This road, too, ran straight for
a while,  but  soon it began to  bend  away southwards,  until it came right
under the great shoulder of rock that they had seen from the distance. Black
and  forbidding  it  loomed  above them, darker  than the  dark  sky behind.
Crawling  under  its shadow the road  went on,  and rounding it sprang  east
again and began to climb steeply.
Frodo and Sam were  plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to
care greatly  about  their  peril. Frodo's head  was  bowed; his burden  was
dragging him down again. As soon as the great  Cross-roads  had been passed,
the weight of it, almost forgotten in Ithilien, had begun to grow once more.
Now, feeling the way become steep before his feet, he looked wearily up; and
then he  saw  it, even  as Gollum  had said  that he would: the city of  the
Ringwraiths. He cowered against the stony bank.
A long-tilted  valley, a  deep gulf of shadow,  ran back far  into  the
mountains. Upon the further side, some way  within the valley's arms high on
a  rocky seat upon the black knees  of  the Ephel D®ath, stood the walls and
tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and sky, but it  was lit
with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of
Minas  Ithil long ago, Tower of the  Moon, fair and radiant in the hollow of
the hills. Paler  indeed than  the moon ailing in some  slow eclipse was the
light of it now, wavering and blowing like a  noisome exhalation of decay, a
corpse-light, a light that  illuminated  nothing.  In  the  walls  and tower
windows showed, like countless black holes  looking inward  into  emptiness;
but  the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly, first one way and then
another, a huge ghostly head  leering into the night. For a moment the three
companions  stood there, shrinking,  staring  up with unwilling eyes. Gollum
was the first to recover. Again he pulled  at their cloaks urgently,  but he
spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step was reluctant, and
time seemed to slow its pace. so that between the raising of a foot  and the
setting of it down minutes of loathing passed.
So they came  slowly  to the  white  bridge.  Here  the  road, gleaming
faintly,  passed over the  stream  in the midst of the valley, and went  on,
winding  deviously up towards the city's gate: a black  mouth opening in the
outer circle of the  northward walls. Wide flats lay on either bank, shadowy
meads filled with pale white flowers. Luminous these were too, beautiful and
yet horrible of shape, like the demented  forms in an uneasy dream; and they
gave forth a  faint sickening charnel-smell; an  odour  of rottenness filled
the  air. From  mead to mead  the  bridge sprang. Figures stood there at its
head, carven  with cunning  in forms human  and bestial, but all corrupt and
loathsome.  The water flowing  beneath was  silent, and  it steamed, but the
vapour that  rose from it, curling and twisting about the bridge, was deadly
cold. Frodo felt his senses  reeling and his mind darkening. Then  suddenly,
as if some force were  at work other than his own will, he began  to  hurry,
tottering forward, his groping hands held out, his head lolling from side to
side. Both Sam and Gollum ran after him. Sam caught his  master in his arms,
as he stumbled and almost fell, right on the threshold of the bridge.
`Not  that way! No, not that  way! '  whispered  Gollum, but the breath
between  his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whistle, and he
cowered to the ground in terror.
`Hold  up,  Mr. Frodo! ' muttered Sam  in  Frodo's ear. 'Come back! Not
that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.'
Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away from the
city  on the  hill.  The luminous  tower fascinated him,  and he fought  the
desire that was on him to run up the gleaming road towards its gate. At last
with an effort he turned back, and as  he did so, he felt the Ring resisting
him, dragging  at the chain about his  neck; and his  eyes too, as he looked
away, seemed for the moment to  have  been blinded.  The darkness before him
was impenetrable.
Gollum, crawling on  the ground like  a frightened animal, was  already
vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his  stumbling master,
followed after him as quickly as he could. Not far from the near bank of the
stream there was a gap in the stone-wall beside the road. Through this  they
passed, and Sam saw that they were on a narrow  path that gleamed faintly at
first, as  the main road  did,  until  climbing  above  the meads of  deadly
flowers it faded and went dark, winding its crooked way up into the northern
sides of the valley.
Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum
in front of  them, except when  he turned back to  beckon them  on. Then his
eyes  shone  with  a green-white light, reflecting  the noisome Morgul-sheen
perhaps, or kindled by some answering mood within. Of that deadly gleam  and
of  the dark eyeholes Frodo  and Sam  were  always conscious,  ever glancing
fearfully over their shoulders,  and  ever dragging their eyes  back to find
the darkening path. Slowly  they laboured on. As they rose  above the stench
and vapours of  the poisonous stream their  breath  became easier and  their
heads clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as  if they had walked
all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy  tide of
water. At last they could go no further without a halt.
Frodo stopped and  sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up  to the
top  of  a  great  hump of bare rock.  Ahead of them  there was a bay in the
valley-side, and  round the  head of this  the path  went on, no more than a
wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the sheer southward face of the
mountain it crawled upwards, until it disappeared into the blackness above.
`I  must rest a  while, Sam,' whispered Frodo. `It's heavy  on me,  Sam
lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry  it? Anyway I must rest before
we venture on to that.' He pointed to the narrow way ahead.
`Sssh! ssh! ' hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. `Sssh! ' His fingers
were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging  at Frodo's sleeve,
he pointed towards the path; but Frodo would not move.
`Not  yet,' he  said,  'not  yet.' Weariness and  more  than  weariness
oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind  and body.
`I must rest,' he muttered.
At  this  Gollum's fear  and  agitation became so  great that he  spoke
again,  hissing  behind  his hand, as  if to  keep  the  sound  from  unseen
listeners  in the air. `Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes can see us.
When they come  to the  bridge they will see  us. Come away!  Climb,  climb!
Come! '
`Come, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. `He's right, again. We can't stay here.'
'All  right,'  said Frodo  in a  remote voice, as of one  speaking half
asleep. `I will try.' Wearily he got to his feet.
But  it  was too  late.  At that moment the rock quivered  and trembled
beneath them. The  great rumbling noise, louder than ever before, rolled  in
the ground and echoed in the mountains.  Then  with searing suddenness there
came a great red flash. Far beyond the eastern  mountains it leapt into  the
