Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum
in front of  them, except when  he turned back to  beckon them  on. Then his
eyes  shone  with  a green-white light, reflecting  the noisome Morgul-sheen
perhaps, or kindled by some answering mood within. Of that deadly gleam  and
of  the dark eyeholes Frodo  and Sam  were  always conscious,  ever glancing
fearfully over their shoulders,  and  ever dragging their eyes  back to find
the darkening path. Slowly  they laboured on. As they rose  above the stench
and vapours of  the poisonous stream their  breath  became easier and  their
heads clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as  if they had walked
all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy  tide of
water. At last they could go no further without a halt.
Frodo stopped and  sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up  to the
top  of  a  great  hump of bare rock.  Ahead of them  there was a bay in the
valley-side, and  round the  head of this  the path  went on, no more than a
wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the sheer southward face of the
mountain it crawled upwards, until it disappeared into the blackness above.
`I  must rest a  while, Sam,' whispered Frodo. `It's heavy  on me,  Sam
lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry  it? Anyway I must rest before
we venture on to that.' He pointed to the narrow way ahead.
`Sssh! ssh! ' hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. `Sssh! ' His fingers
were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging  at Frodo's sleeve,
he pointed towards the path; but Frodo would not move.
`Not  yet,' he  said,  'not  yet.' Weariness and  more  than  weariness
oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind  and body.
`I must rest,' he muttered.
At  this  Gollum's fear  and  agitation became so  great that he  spoke
again,  hissing  behind  his hand, as  if to  keep  the  sound  from  unseen
listeners  in the air. `Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes can see us.
When they come  to the  bridge they will see  us. Come away!  Climb,  climb!
Come! '
`Come, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. `He's right, again. We can't stay here.'
'All  right,'  said Frodo  in a  remote voice, as of one  speaking half
asleep. `I will try.' Wearily he got to his feet.
But  it  was too  late.  At that moment the rock quivered  and trembled
beneath them. The  great rumbling noise, louder than ever before, rolled  in
the ground and echoed in the mountains.  Then  with searing suddenness there
came a great red flash. Far beyond the eastern  mountains it leapt into  the
sky and splashed the lowering clouds with crimson.  In that valley of shadow
and  cold deathly light it  seemed  unbearably violent  and fierce. Peaks of
stone and ridges like notched knives sprang out in staring black against the
uprushing flame in Gorgoroth. Then came a great crack of thunder.
And Minas Morgul answered. There was a flare of livid lightnings: forks
of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into
the sullen clouds. The earth groaned; and out of the city there came  a cry.
Mingled  with harsh high voices as of birds of prey, and the shrill neighing
of horses wild with rage  and fear, there came a rending screech, shivering,
rising swiftly to a piercing pitch beyond the range of hearing.  The hobbits
wheeled round towards it, and cast themselves down, holding their hands upon
their ears.
As the terrible cry ended, falling back  through a long sickening  wail
to  silence, Frodo slowly  raised his head.  Across the  narrow  valley, now
almost on  a level with his eyes, the walls of the evil city stood,  and its
cavernous  gate, shaped like an open mouth with gleaming  teeth,  was gaping
wide. And out of the gate an army came.
All that  host  was clad in  sable, dark  as the night. Against the wan
walls and  the luminous pavement  of  the  road Frodo could  see them, small
black figures in rank upon rank,  marching  swiftly  and  silently,  passing
outwards in  an endless stream. Before them went a great cavalry of horsemen
moving like  ordered shadows, and at their head was one greater than all the
rest: a Rider, all black, save that on his  hooded head he had a helm like a
crown that  flickered with  a  perilous  light.  Now he was drawing near the
bridge below,  and Frodo's staring eyes followed him,  unable to  wink or to
withdraw. Surely there was the Lord of the  Nine Riders returned to earth to
lead his ghastly  host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king
whose cold  hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife. The
old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo's heart.
Even  as these thoughts  pierced him with dread  and held him  bound as
with a  spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right  before the  entrance of the
bridge, and behind him all the host stood still. There was  a pause, a  dead
silence. Maybe it was  the Ring that called  to the  Wraith-lord, and for  a
moment he was troubled, sensing some other power within his valley. This way
and that turned the dark head helmed  and  crowned  with  fear, sweeping the
shadows with its unseen eyes. Frodo waited, like a bird at the approach of a
snake,  unable to move.  And  as  he  waited, he felt, more urgent than ever
before,  the command  that  he  should  put on  the Ring.  But great as  the
pressure was, he felt no  inclination now to yield to it. He  knew that  the
Ring would only betray him, and that he had not, even if  he  put it on, the
power  to face the  Morgul-king-not yet. There was no  longer any  answer to
that command in his own will,  dismayed by terror though it was, and he felt
only the  beating upon him of a  great power from outside. It took his hand,
and as Frodo watched with his mind, not willing it but in suspense (as if he
looked on some  old story far  away), it moved the hand inch by inch towards
the chain upon his neck. Then his  own will stirred;  slowly  it forced  the
hand  back. and  set it to find another thing, a thing lying hidden near his
breast. Cold and  hard it  seemed as  his  grip closed on it:  the  phial of
Galadriel, so long  treasured, and  almost forgotten till  that hour.  As he
touched it, for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his  mind.
He sighed and bent his head.
At  that moment the Wraith-king  turned and spurred  his horse and rode
across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe the elven-hoods
defied his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small enemy; being strengthened,
had turned  aside his thought.  But  he  was  in haste. Already the hour had
struck,  and at his great Master's  bidding he must march with  war into the
West.
Soon he had passed, like a shadow  into shadow, down  the winding road,
and  behind  him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So great an  army
had never issued from that vale since the  days of  Isildur's might; no host
so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin; and yet  it
was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth.
Frodo  stirred. And suddenly  his heart went out to Faramir. 'The storm
has burst at last,' he thought. `This great  array of spears  and  swords is
going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He  guessed it, but did
he know the hour? And  who can now hold  the fords when the King of the
Nine
Riders comes? And  other armies will  come.  I  am too late. All is lost.  I
tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will
ever know. There will be  no one  I can  tell. It will be in vain.' Overcome
with weakness he wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge.
Then at a great distance, as if it  came out of memories of  the Shire,
some sunlit early morning,  when  the  day called and doors were opening, he
heard  Sam's voice  speaking. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  Wake up! ' Had the voice
