before,  the command  that  he  should  put on  the Ring.  But great as  the
pressure was, he felt no  inclination now to yield to it. He  knew that  the
Ring would only betray him, and that he had not, even if  he  put it on, the
power  to face the  Morgul-king-not yet. There was no  longer any  answer to
that command in his own will,  dismayed by terror though it was, and he felt
only the  beating upon him of a  great power from outside. It took his hand,
and as Frodo watched with his mind, not willing it but in suspense (as if he
looked on some  old story far  away), it moved the hand inch by inch towards
the chain upon his neck. Then his  own will stirred;  slowly  it forced  the
hand  back. and  set it to find another thing, a thing lying hidden near his
breast. Cold and  hard it  seemed as  his  grip closed on it:  the  phial of
Galadriel, so long  treasured, and  almost forgotten till  that hour.  As he
touched it, for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his  mind.
He sighed and bent his head.
At  that moment the Wraith-king  turned and spurred  his horse and rode
across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe the elven-hoods
defied his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small enemy; being strengthened,
had turned  aside his thought.  But  he  was  in haste. Already the hour had
struck,  and at his great Master's  bidding he must march with  war into the
West.
Soon he had passed, like a shadow  into shadow, down  the winding road,
and  behind  him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So great an  army
had never issued from that vale since the  days of  Isildur's might; no host
so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin; and yet  it
was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth.
Frodo  stirred. And suddenly  his heart went out to Faramir. 'The storm
has burst at last,' he thought. `This great  array of spears  and  swords is
going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He  guessed it, but did
he know the hour? And  who can now hold  the fords when the King of the
Nine
Riders comes? And  other armies will  come.  I  am too late. All is lost.  I
tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will
ever know. There will be  no one  I can  tell. It will be in vain.' Overcome
with weakness he wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge.
Then at a great distance, as if it  came out of memories of  the Shire,
some sunlit early morning,  when  the  day called and doors were opening, he
heard  Sam's voice  speaking. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  Wake up! ' Had the voice
added:  `Your breakfast is  ready,' he  would hardly  have  been  surprised.
Certainly Sam was urgent. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone,' he said.
There was  a dull clang. The gates of Minas Morgul had closed. The last
rank of spears had  vanished down  the road. The tower still grinned  across
the valley, but the light was fading  in it. The whole city was falling back
into  a  dark brooding  shade,  and  silence.  Yet still it was filled  with
watchfulness.
'Wake  up,  Mr. Frodo!  They're gone, and  we'd better  go too. There's
something still alive in that place, something with eyes,  or a seeing mind,
if you take  me; and the  longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get
on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! '
Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left him, but
the weakness had  passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling now as clearly as a
moment before he had  felt the opposite,  that  what he had to do, he had to
do, if he could, and that whether  Faramir or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel
or Gandalf or anyone else ever knew about it was beside the purpose. He took
his staff in one hand and the phial in his other. When he saw that the clear
light was already welling through his fingers, he  thrust it into his  bosom
and held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul,  now no
more  than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take the upward
road.
Gollum, it  seemed,  had  crawled off along the ledge into the darkness
beyond, when the  gates  of Minas  Morgul  opened, leaving the hobbits where
they  lay. He now came creeping back, his  teeth chattering and his  fingers
snapping. `Foolish!  Silly!  '  he hissed. `Make haste!  They  mustn't think
danger has passed. It hasn't. Make haste! '
They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing ledge. It
was little to the liking of either of  them, not even  after facing so  many
other perils; but it did not  last  long.  Soon the  path reached a  rounded
angle  where  the  mountain-side  swelled out  again, and  there it suddenly
entered a narrow  opening in the rock. They had come to the first stair that
Gollum had spoken of. The  darkness  was almost complete, and they could see
nothing  much  beyond their hands' stretch; but  Gollum's  eyes shone  pale,
several feet above, as he turned back towards them.
`Careful! ' he whispered. `Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful! '
Care was certainly needed. Frodo and  Sam at  first felt easier, having
now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep as a ladder,
and as they climbed up and  up, they became more  and more aware of the long
black fall  behind them.  And the steps  were narrow,  spaced unevenly,  and
often treacherous: they  were worn and  smooth at  the  edges, and some were
broken, and  some cracked  as foot was set  upon them. The hobbits struggled
on,  until at last they  were  clinging with  desperate fingers to the steps
ahead, and forcing their  aching knees  to bend and  straighten; and ever as
the stair cut its way deeper  into the  sheer mountain the rocky walls  rose
higher and higher above their heads.
At  length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they  saw
Gollum's  eyes peering  down at them again. `We're up,' he whispered. 'First
stair's past. Clever hobbits to  climb so high, very  clever hobbits. Just a
few more little steps and that's all, yes.'
Dizzy and very  tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last
step, and sat down rubbing their legs  and knees. They were in  a  deep dark
passage that seemed still to go  up before  them,  though at a gentler slope
and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest long.
'There's another stair still,' he said. `Much  longer stair. Rest  when
we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.'
Sam groaned. 'Longer, did you say? ' he asked.
'Yes, yess, longer,' said Gollum. `But not  so  difficult. Hobbits have
climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.'
'And what after that? ' said Sam.
`We shall see,' said Gollum softly. `O yes, we shall see! '
'I thought you said there  was  a  tunnel,' said  Sam.  `Isn't  there a
tunnel or something to go through? '
'O yes,  there's a tunnel,' said Gollum. `But hobbits  can rest  before
they try that. If they get through that,  they'll be nearly at the top. Very
nearly, if they get through. O yes! '
Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now  he felt cold and
clammy, and there was a chill draught in the dark passage, blowing down from
the invisible  heights above. He got up and shook himself.  `Well, let's  go
on! ' he said. `This is no place to sit in.'
The passage seemed to go on  for miles, and always the chill air flowed
over them, rising as they went on to  a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to
be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to turn them back from the
secrets of the high places,  or to blow them away  into the darkness behind.
They only knew  that  they had come  to the end, when suddenly  they felt no
