'No!  I could  not!' he said  to  himself.  'It is one thing to take my
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary,
and food  and  bed are  sweet.  To  take them into exile,  where  hunger and
weariness may have  no cure,  is quite another - even if they are willing to
come. The inheritance  is mine  alone.  I don't think I  ought  even to take
Sam.' He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him.
'Well, Sam!' he said. 'What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon as
ever I  can - in fact I  have made up my mind now not even to wait  a day at
Crickhollow, if it can be helped.'
'Very good, sir!'
'You still mean to come with me?'
'I do.'
'It  is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Most
likely neither of us will come back.'
'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam.
'Don't you leave him!       they said to me.     Leave him!      I said.  I never mean to. I
am  going  with  him, if  he climbs to the Moon,  and if  any of those Black
Rulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with,                    I said. They
laughed.'
'Who are   they,  and what are you talking about?'
'The  Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and  they seemed to know
you were going away, so I didn't see the use of denying  it. Wonderful folk,
Elves, sir! Wonderful!'
'They are,' said Frodo.  'Do you like  them still,  now  you have had a
closer view?'
'They  seem a bit above my likes and dislikes,  so  to speak,' answered
Sam slowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite
different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it
were.'
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward
sign of the odd change that seemed  to have come  over him. It did not sound
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he  knew. But it looked
like the old  Sam Gamgee sitting  there, except that  his face was unusually
thoughtful.
'Do  you feel any  need to  leave the Shire now - now that your wish to
see them has come true already?' he asked.
'Yes,  sir. I  don't  know how to  say it, but after last night  I feel
different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind  of way.  I know  we are going  to
take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can't turn back. It isn't
to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that  I want - I don't rightly
know what I  want: but I  have something to do before the end, and  it  lies
ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.'
'I don't  altogether.  But I  understand  that Gandalf chose me a  good
companion. I am content. We will go together.'
Frodo finished his  breakfast in silence.  Then standing  up he  looked
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin.
'All ready to start?' he said as Pippin ran up. 'We must be getting off
at once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.'
'You  slept  late, you mean,' said Pippin. 'I was up long before; and we
are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.'
'I  have finished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry
as quickly  as possible. I am not  going out of the way, back to the road we
left last night: I am going to cut straight across country from here.'
'Then you are going to fly,'  said Pippin.  'You  won't cut straight on
foot anywhere in this country.'
'We  can  cut  straighter than the road anyway,'  answered  Frodo. 'The
Ferry is east from Woodhall;  but the hard road curves away to the left -you
can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes round  the north  end of
the Marish so as to  strike  the causeway from  the  Bridge above Stock. But
that is miles out of the way.  We could save a quarter of the distance if we
made a line for the Ferry from where we stand.'
'Short cuts make  long delays,'       argued  Pippin. 'The  country  is rough
round  here, and  there are bogs and  all  kinds of difficulties down in the
Marish -I know the land  in these parts. And if you are worrying about Black
Riders, I can't  see that it is any worse meeting  them on  a road than in a
wood or a field.'
'It is  less  easy  to find people in the  woods and  fields,' answered
Frodo. 'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that
you will be looked for on the road and not off it.'
'All right!' said Pippin. 'I will follow  you into every bog and ditch.
But it is  hard! I had counted  on  passing the           Golden Perch       at Stock before
sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it is a long time
since I tasted it.'
'That settles it!'  said Frodo. 'Short cuts  make delays, but inns make
longer  ones. At all costs we must  keep  you away from the                  Golden Perch.       We
want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?'
'I  will go  along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of  private
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).
'Then  if we are going to toil  through bog and briar, let's  go  now!'
said Pippin.
It was  already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds
were  beginning  to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain.
The hobbits scrambled down a steep  green  bank and  plunged into the  thick
trees below. Their course  had been chosen to  leave Woodhall to their left,
and  to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side
of  the  hills,  until they reached the flats  beyond. Then they  could make
straight  for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.
He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it  had
appeared. There were no paths  in the  undergrowth, and they did not  get on
very  fast.  When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a
stream  running  down from  the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with  steep
slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the
line they had chosen. They could  not jump over it, nor indeed get across it
at  all without  getting wet, scratched, and muddy.  They  halted, wondering
what to do. 'First check!' said Pippin, smiling grimly.
Sam Gamgee  looked back.  Through an opening  in  the trees he caught a
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down.
'Look!'  he said, clutching  Frodo by the  arm. They all looked, and on
the edge high above  them they saw against the sky a horse  standing. Beside
it stooped a black figure.
They  at once gave  up any  idea of going back. Frodo led  the way, and
plunged quickly into the  thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said to
Pippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but  we
got under  cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear
anything coming?'
They  stood still,  almost holding  their breath as  they listened; but
there was  no sound  of pursuit. 'I  don't fancy  he  would try bringing his
horse down that bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he  knows we came down it.  We
had better be going on.'
Going  on was  not altogether easy.  They had packs  to carry,  and the
