and as they climbed up and  up, they became more  and more aware of the long
black fall  behind them.  And the steps  were narrow,  spaced unevenly,  and
often treacherous: they  were worn and  smooth at  the  edges, and some were
broken, and  some cracked  as foot was set  upon them. The hobbits struggled
on,  until at last they  were  clinging with  desperate fingers to the steps
ahead, and forcing their  aching knees  to bend and  straighten; and ever as
the stair cut its way deeper  into the  sheer mountain the rocky walls  rose
higher and higher above their heads.
At  length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they  saw
Gollum's  eyes peering  down at them again. `We're up,' he whispered. 'First
stair's past. Clever hobbits to  climb so high, very  clever hobbits. Just a
few more little steps and that's all, yes.'
Dizzy and very  tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last
step, and sat down rubbing their legs  and knees. They were in  a  deep dark
passage that seemed still to go  up before  them,  though at a gentler slope
and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest long.
'There's another stair still,' he said. `Much  longer stair. Rest  when
we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.'
Sam groaned. 'Longer, did you say? ' he asked.
'Yes, yess, longer,' said Gollum. `But not  so  difficult. Hobbits have
climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.'
'And what after that? ' said Sam.
`We shall see,' said Gollum softly. `O yes, we shall see! '
'I thought you said there  was  a  tunnel,' said  Sam.  `Isn't  there a
tunnel or something to go through? '
'O yes,  there's a tunnel,' said Gollum. `But hobbits  can rest  before
they try that. If they get through that,  they'll be nearly at the top. Very
nearly, if they get through. O yes! '
Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now  he felt cold and
clammy, and there was a chill draught in the dark passage, blowing down from
the invisible  heights above. He got up and shook himself.  `Well, let's  go
on! ' he said. `This is no place to sit in.'
The passage seemed to go on  for miles, and always the chill air flowed
over them, rising as they went on to  a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to
be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to turn them back from the
secrets of the high places,  or to blow them away  into the darkness behind.
They only knew  that  they had come  to the end, when suddenly  they felt no
wall at their right hand. They  could see very little. Great black shapeless
masses and deep  grey shadows loomed above  them and about them, but now
and
again a dull  red light flickered up under  the lowering  clouds, and for  a
moment  they were aware of  tall peaks, in  front  and on  either side, like
pillars holding up a vast sagging roof. They  seemed to have climbed up many
hundreds of feet, on to a wide shelf. A cliff was on their  left and a chasm
on their right.
Gollum led the way close under the cliff.  For the present they were no
longer climbing, but the  ground  was now more broken  and  dangerous in the
dark, and there  were blocks and  lumps of fallen stone  in the  way.  Their
going  was slow and  cautious.  How  many hours  had  passed  since they had
entered the  Morgul Vale  neither Sam nor Frodo could  any longer guess. The
night seemed endless.
At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and once more
a stairway opened before them. Again  they halted, and  again they  began to
climb. It was a long and weary ascent; but this  stairway did not delve into
the  mountain-side. Here  the huge cliff face sloped backwards, and the path
like  a  snake wound  to and fro across it. At one point it crawled sideways
right to the  edge of the dark chasm, and Frodo  glancing down saw below him
as  a vast deep pit the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley.  Down
in  its depths glimmered like  a glow-worm thread the  wraith-road from  the
dead city to the Nameless Pass. He turned hastily away.
Still  on and up the  stairway bent and  crawled, until  at last with a
final flight, short  and straight, it climbed out again on to another level.
The  path had veered away from the main pass in the great ravine, and it now
followed  its own  perilous course at the bottom of a lesser cleft among the
higher  regions  of  the Ephel D®ath. Dimly  the hobbits could  discern tall
piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on either side, between which were great
crevices  and fissures blacker than  the night, where  forgotten winters had
gnawed and carved the sunless stone. And now the red light in the sky seemed
stronger; though they could not tell whether a  dreadful morning were indeed
coming to this place of shadow, or whether  they saw only the flame of  some
great violence  of  Sauron in  the torment  of Gorgoroth  beyond.  Still far
ahead, and still high above, Frodo, looking up, saw, as he guessed, the very
crown of  this  bitter road. Against the sullen redness of the eastern sky a
cleft was outlined  in  the topmost ridge,  narrow, deep-cloven between  two
black shoulders; and on either shoulder was a horn of stone.
He paused  and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall
and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light in the land
beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it  was a black  tower poised
above the outer pass. He touched Sam's arm and pointed.
'I  don't like the look of that! ' said Sam.  `So  this secret  way  of
yours is guarded after all,' he growled, turning to Gollum. 'As you knew all
along, I suppose? '
'All ways  are watched, yes,' said Gollum.  `Of  course they  are.  But
hobbits must  try  some way. This may  be least watched. Perhaps they've all
gone away to big battle, perhaps! '
'Perhaps,' grunted Sam.  'Well, it  still  seems a long  way off, and a
long way  up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel. I think  you
ought to rest now,  Mr. Frodo. I don't know what time of day or night it is,
but we've kept going for hours and hours.'
`Yes, we must  rest,' said Frodo. 'Let us find some corner out  of  the
wind, and gather our  strength-for  the last lap.' For so  he felt it to be.
The  terrors of  the land  beyond, and  the deed to  be  done there,  seemed
remote, too  far off yet to  trouble  him. All his mind  was bent on getting
through or over this impenetrable wall and guard.  If once he could do  that
impossible thing, then  somehow the errand would be  accomplished, or so  it
seemed to him in that  dark hour of weariness, still  labouring in the stony
shadows under Cirith Ungol.
In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down:  Frodo
and  Sam a  little  way within. and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the
opening. There the hobbits took what  they expected would be their last meal
before they went down into the Nameless Land, maybe the last meal they
would
ever  eat together. Some of the food  of Gondor they ate, and  wafers of the
waybread of the Elves. and they drank a little. But of their water they were
sparing and took only enough to moisten their dry mouths.
`I wonder when we'll find water again? ' said Sam. 'But I suppose  even
over there they drink? Orcs drink, don't they? '
'Yes,  they drink,' said Frodo. 'But do not let  us speak of that. Such
drink is not for us.'
`Then  all  the  more need  to fill our bottles,' said  Sam. `But there
isn't any water up here: not  a sound or a trickle  have I heard. And anyway
