black shoulders; and on either shoulder was a horn of stone.
He paused  and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall
and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light in the land
beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it  was a black  tower poised
above the outer pass. He touched Sam's arm and pointed.
'I  don't like the look of that! ' said Sam.  `So  this secret  way  of
yours is guarded after all,' he growled, turning to Gollum. 'As you knew all
along, I suppose? '
'All ways  are watched, yes,' said Gollum.  `Of  course they  are.  But
hobbits must  try  some way. This may  be least watched. Perhaps they've all
gone away to big battle, perhaps! '
'Perhaps,' grunted Sam.  'Well, it  still  seems a long  way off, and a
long way  up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel. I think  you
ought to rest now,  Mr. Frodo. I don't know what time of day or night it is,
but we've kept going for hours and hours.'
`Yes, we must  rest,' said Frodo. 'Let us find some corner out  of  the
wind, and gather our  strength-for  the last lap.' For so  he felt it to be.
The  terrors of  the land  beyond, and  the deed to  be  done there,  seemed
remote, too  far off yet to  trouble  him. All his mind  was bent on getting
through or over this impenetrable wall and guard.  If once he could do  that
impossible thing, then  somehow the errand would be  accomplished, or so  it
seemed to him in that  dark hour of weariness, still  labouring in the stony
shadows under Cirith Ungol.
In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down:  Frodo
and  Sam a  little  way within. and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the
opening. There the hobbits took what  they expected would be their last meal
before they went down into the Nameless Land, maybe the last meal they
would
ever  eat together. Some of the food  of Gondor they ate, and  wafers of the
waybread of the Elves. and they drank a little. But of their water they were
sparing and took only enough to moisten their dry mouths.
`I wonder when we'll find water again? ' said Sam. 'But I suppose  even
over there they drink? Orcs drink, don't they? '
'Yes,  they drink,' said Frodo. 'But do not let  us speak of that. Such
drink is not for us.'
`Then  all  the  more need  to fill our bottles,' said  Sam. `But there
isn't any water up here: not  a sound or a trickle  have I heard. And anyway
Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.'
'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,' said Frodo. `We
are not in that valley now, and if we came  on a spring  it would be flowing
into it and not out of it.'
'I  wouldn't  trust  it,' said Sam, 'not  till  I was dying  of thirst.
There's a  wicked feeling  about this  place.' He  sniffed. 'And  a smell, I
fancy. Do you notice it? A queer kind of a smell, stuffy. I don't like it.'
'I don't like anything here at all.' said Frodo, `step or stone, breath
or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is laid.'
'Yes, that's so,'  said Sam. `And we shouldn't be here at all,  if we'd
known more about it before we started. But I  suppose  it's often  that way.
The brave things  in the old  tales and songs,  Mr. Frodo: adventures,  as I
used to call them. I used to think that they were things  the wonderful folk
of the stories  went out and looked  for,  because they wanted them, because
they were exciting and  life was a bit dull, a kind of a sport, as you might
say. But that's not the  way of it with the tales  that  really mattered, or
the  ones that stay in the mind. Folk seem to have been just landed in them,
usually -- their paths were laid that way, as you put it. But  I expect they
had lots of chances, like us, of turning back, only they didn't. And if they
had, we  shouldn't know, because they'd have  been  forgotten. We hear about
those as just went on  -- and not all to a  good end, mind you; at least not
to what  folk  inside a story and not outside it call a good  end. You know,
coming home, and finding things all right, though not quite the same -- like
old Mr Bilbo.  But those aren't always  the best tales to  hear, though they
may be the  best tales to get landed in! I wonder what sort of a tale  we've
fallen into? '
`I wonder,' said Frodo. 'But I don't know. And that's the way of a real
tale. Take any one that you're fond of. You may know, or guess, what kind of
a  tale it is, happy-ending or sad-ending, but the people  in it don't know.
And you don't want them to.'
'No, sir, of course not. Beren now,  he  never thought he was  going to
get that Silmaril from the  Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet he did,  and
that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours.  But  that's  a  long
tale, of course, and goes on past the happiness and into grief and beyond it
-- and the  Silmaril  went  on and  came to Edrendil. And why, sir, I  never
thought of that before! We've got -- you've got some  of  the light of it in
that star-glass  that the Lady gave you! Why,  to  think of it, we're in the
same tale still! It's going on. Don't the great tales never end? '
'No, they  never  end  as  tales,' said Frodo.  `But the people in them
come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later -- or sooner.'
'And then we can have some rest and  some sleep,' said Sam.  He laughed
grimly.  'And I  mean just  that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain ordinary rest, and
sleep, and  waking up  to a morning's work in the garden. I'm afraid  that's
all I'm hoping for all the time. All the big important  plans are not for my
sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs  or tales. We're in
one,  or course; but I mean: put into words, you know, told by the fireside,
or read out of a great big book with red  and black letters, years and years
afterwards. And people will say: "Let's hear about Frodo and the Ring! " And
they'll say: "Yes, that's one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave.
wasn't he, dad?"  "Yes, my boy, the  famousest of  the hobbits,  and  that's
saying a lot."'
`It's saying a lot too much,' said Frodo, and he laughed,  a long clear
laugh from  his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in those places since
Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the  stones
were listening and the  tall rocks leaning over them. But Frodo did not heed
them;  he laughed again. 'Why, Sam,' he said, 'to hear you somehow makes  me
as merry as if the story was already written. But you've left out one of the
chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. "I  want to hear more about Sam,
dad. Why  didn't they put  in more of his talk, dad? That's  what I like, it
makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn't have  got far without Sam, would he,
dad?
" '
`Now, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'you shouldn't make fun. I was serious. '
`So  was I,' said Frodo, 'and so I am. We're  going on a bit  too fast.
You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story, and it  is
all too likely that some will say at this point: "Shut the book now, dad; we
don't want to read any more." '
`Maybe,' said Sam, 'but I wouldn't be one to say that.  Things done and
over and made into part of the great  tales are  different. Why, even Gollum
might be  good in a  tale,  better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he
used to like  tales himself once, by his own  account. I wonder if he thinks
he's the hero or the villain?
`Gollum!' he called. `Would  you like to be the hero -- now where's  he
got to again?'
