same tale still! It's going on. Don't the great tales never end? '
'No, they  never  end  as  tales,' said Frodo.  `But the people in them
come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later -- or sooner.'
'And then we can have some rest and  some sleep,' said Sam.  He laughed
grimly.  'And I  mean just  that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain ordinary rest, and
sleep, and  waking up  to a morning's work in the garden. I'm afraid  that's
all I'm hoping for all the time. All the big important  plans are not for my
sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs  or tales. We're in
one,  or course; but I mean: put into words, you know, told by the fireside,
or read out of a great big book with red  and black letters, years and years
afterwards. And people will say: "Let's hear about Frodo and the Ring! " And
they'll say: "Yes, that's one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave.
wasn't he, dad?"  "Yes, my boy, the  famousest of  the hobbits,  and  that's
saying a lot."'
`It's saying a lot too much,' said Frodo, and he laughed,  a long clear
laugh from  his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in those places since
Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the  stones
were listening and the  tall rocks leaning over them. But Frodo did not heed
them;  he laughed again. 'Why, Sam,' he said, 'to hear you somehow makes  me
as merry as if the story was already written. But you've left out one of the
chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. "I  want to hear more about Sam,
dad. Why  didn't they put  in more of his talk, dad? That's  what I like, it
makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn't have  got far without Sam, would he,
dad?
" '
`Now, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'you shouldn't make fun. I was serious. '
`So  was I,' said Frodo, 'and so I am. We're  going on a bit  too fast.
You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story, and it  is
all too likely that some will say at this point: "Shut the book now, dad; we
don't want to read any more." '
`Maybe,' said Sam, 'but I wouldn't be one to say that.  Things done and
over and made into part of the great  tales are  different. Why, even Gollum
might be  good in a  tale,  better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he
used to like  tales himself once, by his own  account. I wonder if he thinks
he's the hero or the villain?
`Gollum!' he called. `Would  you like to be the hero -- now where's  he
got to again?'
There was no  sign of  him at  the mouth  of their shelter nor  in  the
shadows near. He had refused their food, though he had, as usual, accepted a
mouthful of water; and then  he had seemed to curl up for a sleep:  They had
supposed that one at any  rate of his objects  in his  long absence  the day
before had been to hunt for food to his own liking; and now he had evidently
slipped off again while they talked. But what for this time?
`I don't like his sneaking off without saying,' said Sam. 'And least of
all now. He can't  be looking for food up here, not unless there's some kind
of rock he fancies. Why, there isn't even a bit of moss! '
`It's no  good worrying about him now,'  said  Frodo. `We couldn't have
got so  far,  not even within  sight of the pass, without  him, and so we'll
have to put up with his ways. If he's false, he's false.'
'All the same, I'd  rather have  him under  my eye,' said Sam. 'All the
more so, if  he's false. Do you remember he never would say if this pass was
guarded or no? And now we see a  tower there -- and it may be deserted,  and
it may  not. Do  you think he's gone to fetch  them, Orcs  or  whatever they
are?'
`No,  I  don't  think  so,'  answered Frodo.  'Even if he's up  to some
wickedness, and I suppose that's not unlikely, I don't think it's  that: not
to  fetch Orcs,  or  any servants of the  Enemy.  Why wait till now,  and go
through all the labour of the climb, and come so near the land  he fears? He
could probably have  betrayed us to Orcs many times since we met him. No, if
it's  anything,  it will  be some  little private trick of  his  own-that he
thinks is quite secret.'
`Well,  I suppose  you're  right, Mr.  Frodo,'  said Sam.  'Not that it
comforts me mightily. I don't make no  mistake:  I  don't doubt he'd hand                     me
over  to Orcs  as  gladly  as kiss  his hand.  But  I was forgetting --  his
Precious. No, I  suppose the  whole  time it's  been              The  Precious for  poor
Smjagol    . That's the one idea in  all his little schemes, if he has any.  But
how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.'
'Very  likely  he can't guess himself,' said Frodo. `And I don't  think
he's got just  one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think he really is in
part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy. as long as he can. For that
would be the last  disaster for himself too. if the Enemy got it. And in the
other part, perhaps, he's just biding his time and waiting on chance.'
'Yes, Slinker  and Stinker, as I've said before,'  said  Sam.  'But the
nearer they get to the  Enemy's land the more like Stinker Slinker will get.
Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he  won't let us really take  the
precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.'
`We haven't got there yet,' said Frodo.
'No, but we'd better keep our eyes skinned till we do.  If we're caught
napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but what it would be
safe for you to have a wink now, master.  Safe, if you lay close  to me. I'd
be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I'd keep watch over you; and anyway,
if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you
without
your Sam knowing it.'
`Sleep!'  said  Frodo and sighed, as if out of  a desert  he had seen a
mirage of cool green. 'Yes, even here I could sleep.'
`Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.'
And so Gollum found  them hours later, when  he returned,  crawling and
creeping down the path out  of the gloom ahead. Sam sat  propped against the
stone, his head dropping  sideways and his  breathing heavy. In his  lap lay
Frodo's head,  drowned deep in  sleep; upon his white  forehead lay  one  of
Sam's brown hands, and the  other lay softly upon his master's breast. Peace
was in both their faces.
Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry
face.  The gleam faded from his eyes,  and they went dim and grey,  old  and
tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he turned away, peering back
up towards  the  pass,  shaking  his head, as  if engaged in  some  interior
debate. Then he came back, and  slowly  putting out  a trembling  hand, very
cautiously he touched Frodo's knee -- but almost the touch was a caress. For
a fleeting moment,  could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have
thought that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had
carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin,  and the fields and
streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing.
But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in  his sleep, and
immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was Gollum --
`pawing
at master,' as he thought.
`Hey you!' he said roughly. `What are you up to?'
'Nothing, nothing,' said Gollum softly. `Nice Master!'
`I daresay,' said Sam. 'But where have you been to  -- sneaking off and
sneaking back, you old villain? '
