Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he  won't let us really take  the
precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.'
`We haven't got there yet,' said Frodo.
'No, but we'd better keep our eyes skinned till we do.  If we're caught
napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but what it would be
safe for you to have a wink now, master.  Safe, if you lay close  to me. I'd
be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I'd keep watch over you; and anyway,
if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you
without
your Sam knowing it.'
`Sleep!'  said  Frodo and sighed, as if out of  a desert  he had seen a
mirage of cool green. 'Yes, even here I could sleep.'
`Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.'
And so Gollum found  them hours later, when  he returned,  crawling and
creeping down the path out  of the gloom ahead. Sam sat  propped against the
stone, his head dropping  sideways and his  breathing heavy. In his  lap lay
Frodo's head,  drowned deep in  sleep; upon his white  forehead lay  one  of
Sam's brown hands, and the  other lay softly upon his master's breast. Peace
was in both their faces.
Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry
face.  The gleam faded from his eyes,  and they went dim and grey,  old  and
tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he turned away, peering back
up towards  the  pass,  shaking  his head, as  if engaged in  some  interior
debate. Then he came back, and  slowly  putting out  a trembling  hand, very
cautiously he touched Frodo's knee -- but almost the touch was a caress. For
a fleeting moment,  could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have
thought that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had
carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin,  and the fields and
streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing.
But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in  his sleep, and
immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was Gollum --
`pawing
at master,' as he thought.
`Hey you!' he said roughly. `What are you up to?'
'Nothing, nothing,' said Gollum softly. `Nice Master!'
`I daresay,' said Sam. 'But where have you been to  -- sneaking off and
sneaking back, you old villain? '
Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint  flickered under  his  heavy
lids. Almost  spider-like  he  looked now, crouched  back on his bent limbs,
with his  protruding eyes. The fleeting  moment  had  passed, beyond recall.
`Sneaking,  sneaking!'  he  hissed.  'Hobbits always  so polite, yes. O nice
hobbits! Smjagol brings them  up secret  ways that  nobody else  could find.
Tired he is, thirsty  he is, yes thirsty; and he guides them and he searches
for paths, and they say       sneak, sneak    . Very nice friends,  O yes my precious,
very nice.'
Sam felt  a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. 'Sorry.' he said.
'I'm sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I  shouldn't  have been
sleeping, and that made me a bit sharp.  But Mr.  Frodo.  he's that tired, I
asked him to have a wink; and well,  that's how it is. Sorry. But where                    have
you been to? '
`Sneaking,' said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his eyes.
'O very well,' said Sam, `have it your own way! I don't suppose it's so
far  from the truth. And now  we'd  better all  be  sneaking along together.
What's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? '
'It's tomorrow,' said Gollum, 'or this  was  tomorrow when hobbits went
to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous-if poor Smjagol wasn't sneaking about
to watch.'
`I think we shall  get tired  of that word soon,' said Sam. 'But  never
mind.  I'll  wake master up.' Gently he smoothed the hair back  from Frodo's
brow, and bending down spoke softly to him.
`Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! '
Frodo stirred  and  opened  his  eyes,  and  smiled, seeing Sam's  face
bending over him.  `Calling me early  aren't you,  Sam?' he said. `It's dark
still! '
'Yes  it's  always  dark here,' said  Sam. `But Gollum's come  back Mr.
Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.'
Frodo drew a deep breath  and sat up. `The last lap! ' he said. 'Hullo,
Smjagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? '
`No food, no rest, nothing for Smjagol,' said Gollum. `He's a sneak.'
Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself.
'Don't  take  names to  yourself,  Smjagol,'  said Frodo. 'It's  unwise
whether they are true or false.'
`Smjagol has to take what's given  him,' answered Gollum. 'He was given
that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so much.'
Frodo looked at Sam. 'Yes sir,' he said. `I did use the word, waking up
out of my sleep sudden and all  and finding him at hand. I said I was sorry,
but I soon shan't be.'
'Come, let it pass then,' said Frodo. 'But now we seem to have  come to
the point, you and  I, Smjagol. Tell me. Can we  find the rest of the way by
ourselves?  We're in sight of  the pass, of a way in, and  if we can find it
now, then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over. You have done what
you promised,  and  you're free: free to go back to food  and rest, wherever
you wish to  go, except to servants  of the Enemy. And one  day I may reward
you, I or those that remember me.'
`No,  no,  not  yet,'  Gollum whined. `O no!  They  can't  find the way
themselves, can they? O no indeed. There's the tunnel coming.  Smjagol  must
go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.'
