Frodo looked at Sam. 'Yes sir,' he said. `I did use the word, waking up
out of my sleep sudden and all  and finding him at hand. I said I was sorry,
but I soon shan't be.'
'Come, let it pass then,' said Frodo. 'But now we seem to have  come to
the point, you and  I, Smjagol. Tell me. Can we  find the rest of the way by
ourselves?  We're in sight of  the pass, of a way in, and  if we can find it
now, then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over. You have done what
you promised,  and  you're free: free to go back to food  and rest, wherever
you wish to  go, except to servants  of the Enemy. And one  day I may reward
you, I or those that remember me.'
`No,  no,  not  yet,'  Gollum whined. `O no!  They  can't  find the way
themselves, can they? O no indeed. There's the tunnel coming.  Smjagol  must
go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.'
Chapter 9. Shelob's Lair
It  may indeed have been  daytime now, as Gollum said, but the  hobbits
could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky above  was  less
utterly  black,  more like  a  great roof  of smoke; while  instead  of  the
darkness  of deep night, which lingered still in  cracks and  holes, a  grey
blurring shadow shrouded the stony world  about them. They passed on,
Gollum
in front and the hobbits  now side by side, up the long  ravine  between the
piers  and columns of torn and weathered  rock, standing like huge  unshapen
statues on  either hand. There was no  sound. Some way ahead, a mile  or so,
perhaps,   was  a  great  grey  wall,  a   last  huge  upthrusting  mass  of
mountain-stone. Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as  they  approached,
until it towered up high above them, shutting  out the view of all that  lay
beyond. Deep shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air.
`Ugh! That smell!' he said. `It's getting stronger and stronger.'
Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they
saw the  opening  of a cave. `This is the way in,' said Gollum softly. `This
is  the entrance to the tunnel.' He did  not speak its name:  Torech  Ungol,
Shelob's Lair. Out of it came a stench, not the sickly odour of decay in the
meads  of  Morgul, but a foul  reek,  as if filth  unnameable were piled and
hoarded in the dark within.
`Is this the only way, Smjagol? ' said Frodo.
'Yes, yes,' he answered. 'Yes, we must go this way now.'
'D'you mean to say you've been through this hole?' said Sam. `Phew! But
perhaps you don't mind bad smells.'
Gollum's  eyes  glinted. `He  doesn't  know  what  we  minds,  does  he
precious? No,  he  doesn't.  But Smjagol  can  bear things.  Yes.  He's been
through. O yes, right through. It's the only way.'
`And what makes the smell, I  wonder,'  said Sam. `It's like -- well, I
wouldn't  like to say. Some beastly  hole of the  Orcs, I'll warrant, with a
hundred years of their filth in it.'
'Well,'  said Frodo, 'Orcs or  no, if  it's the only  way, we must take
it.'
Drawing a  deep breath they passed inside. In  a few steps they were in
utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages  of  Moria had
Frodo or  Sam known such darkness, and if  possible  here it was  deeper and
denser. There,  there were airs moving,  and echoes,  and a sense  of space.
Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as
it were  in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness itself that, as  it
was breathed,  brought blindness not only  to the  eyes but to the mind,  so
that even the memory of colours and of  forms and of any light faded out  of
thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night was all.
But for a while  they could still feel, and  indeed the senses of their
feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt,
to their surprise, smooth, and the floor, save for a step now and again, was
straight and even, going ever  up  at the  same stiff slope. The  tunnel was
high  and  wide,  so wide  that,  though  the hobbits  walked abreast,  only
touching the side-walls with their  outstretched hands, they were separated,
cut off alone in the darkness.
Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While
they were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear his breath
hissing and  gasping just in  front of them.  But  after a time their senses
became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on,
groping, walking, on and on, mainly by the force of the will with which they
had  entered, will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate
beyond.
Before  they  had gone  very far, perhaps, but time and  distance  soon
passed out of  his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling  the wall, was aware
that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath
of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by.
'There's more  than one passage here,'  he whispered with an effort: it
seemed hard to make his breath give any  sound. `It's as orc-like a place as
ever there could be! '
After that, first he on  the right, and  then Frodo on the left, passed
three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but  there was as yet
no doubt of  the main way,  for it was straight, and did not turn, and still
went steadily up. But how long was it, how much more of this would they have
to  endure, or could they  endure? The breathlessness of the air was growing
as they climbed; and now they seemed often  in the  blind dark to sense some
resistance  thicker  than  the  foul air. As they  thrust forward they  felt
things brush against their heads, or against their hands, long tentacles, or
