utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages  of  Moria had
Frodo or  Sam known such darkness, and if  possible  here it was  deeper and
denser. There,  there were airs moving,  and echoes,  and a sense  of space.
Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as
it were  in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness itself that, as  it
was breathed,  brought blindness not only  to the  eyes but to the mind,  so
that even the memory of colours and of  forms and of any light faded out  of
thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night was all.
But for a while  they could still feel, and  indeed the senses of their
feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt,
to their surprise, smooth, and the floor, save for a step now and again, was
straight and even, going ever  up  at the  same stiff slope. The  tunnel was
high  and  wide,  so wide  that,  though  the hobbits  walked abreast,  only
touching the side-walls with their  outstretched hands, they were separated,
cut off alone in the darkness.
Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While
they were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear his breath
hissing and  gasping just in  front of them.  But  after a time their senses
became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on,
groping, walking, on and on, mainly by the force of the will with which they
had  entered, will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate
beyond.
Before  they  had gone  very far, perhaps, but time and  distance  soon
passed out of  his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling  the wall, was aware
that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath
of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by.
'There's more  than one passage here,'  he whispered with an effort: it
seemed hard to make his breath give any  sound. `It's as orc-like a place as
ever there could be! '
After that, first he on  the right, and  then Frodo on the left, passed
three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but  there was as yet
no doubt of  the main way,  for it was straight, and did not turn, and still
went steadily up. But how long was it, how much more of this would they have
to  endure, or could they  endure? The breathlessness of the air was growing
as they climbed; and now they seemed often  in the  blind dark to sense some
resistance  thicker  than  the  foul air. As they  thrust forward they  felt
things brush against their heads, or against their hands, long tentacles, or
hanging growths perhaps:  they could not tell what  they were. And still the
stench grew. It grew, until almost it seemed to them that smell was the only
clear sense left t¢  them. and  that was for their torment.  One  hour,  two
hours,  three  hours: how many  had  they  passed in  this  lightless  hole?
Hours-days, weeks rather. Sam left the tunnel-side and shrank towards Frodo,
and their hands met and clasped. and so together they still went on.
At length Frodo, groping along the  left-hand  wall, came suddenly to a
void. Almost he fell sideways  into the emptiness. Here was some  opening in
the rock far  wider than any  they had yet passed; and out of it came a reek
so foul, and a sense of lurking malice so intense, that Frodo reeled. And at
that moment Sam too lurched and fell forwards.
Fighting off both the sickness and  the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand.
`Up!  ' he said in  a hoarse breath without  voice. 'It all comes from here,
the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! '
Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam to his
feet, and  forced his own limbs to move. Sam  stumbled beside him. One step,
two steps, three steps-at last six steps. Maybe they had passed the dreadful
unseen opening, but  whether  that was so  or not, suddenly it was easier to
move,  as if  some  hostile will  for the moment  had  released  them.  They
struggled on, still hand in hand.
But almost at once they came to a new difficulty. The tunnel forked, or
so it  seemed, and in the dark they could  not tell which was the wider way,
or  which kept nearer to the straight. Which should they take, the  left, or
the  right? They knew of  nothing  to guide  them, yet a false choice  would
almost certainly be fatal.
`Which way has Gollum gone? ' panted Sam. 'And why didn't he wait? '
`Smjagol!  ' said  Frodo,  trying  to  call. 'Smjagol! '  But his voice
croaked, and the  name fell dead almost as  it left his lips.  There  was no
answer, not an echo, not even a tremor of the air.
`He's really gone this time, I  fancy,'  muttered Sam. `I guess this is
just exactly where  he meant to bring us. Gollum! If ever I lay hands on you
again, you'll be sorry for it.'
Presently,  groping  and fumbling  in  the  dark, they  found  that the
opening on the left was blocked: either it was  a blind, or else  some great
stone had fallen in  the passage. 'This can't be the way,'  Frodo whispered.
'Right or wrong, we must take the other.'
'And quick! ' Sam panted. 'There's something worse than Gollum about. I
can feel something looking at us.'
They had not gone  more than a  few yards  when from behind them came a
sound,  startling and horrible in  the  heavy  padded  silence: a  gurgling,
bubbling noise, and  a  long  venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing
could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring, waiting for they did not
know what.
`It's  a trap!' said Sam, and he  laid his hand upon  the  hilt  of his
sword; and  as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it
came. 'I  wish  old  Tom was near us  now!' he  thought.  Then  as he stood,
darkness  about him and a  blackness of  despair and  anger in his heart. it
seemed  to him that he saw a  light:  a light in his mind, almost unbearably
bright at first, as a sun-ray to the eyes of one long hidden in a windowless
pit. Then  the light became colour: green,  gold, silver, white. Far off, as
in  a  little  picture drawn  by  elven-fingers  he  saw  the Lady Galadriel
standing on the  grass  in  Lurien,  and gifts  were  in her hands.               And you,
Ring-bearer     , he  heard her say,  remote  but clear        , for you  I have prepared
this .
The bubbling hiss  drew nearer,  and there  was a  creaking as  of some
great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on
before it. 'Master, master!' cried Sam, and the  life and  urgency came back
into his voice. 'The Lady's  gift! The star-glass! A light  to you  in  dark
places, she said it was to be. The star-glass! '
`The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly
comprehending.  `Why  yes! Why had  I forgotten it?                  A  light when all  other
lights go out!    And now indeed light alone can help us.'
Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held  aloft the  Phial
of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as  a rising star  struggling
in heavy earthward  mists,  and then as its power waxed,  and hope  grew  in
Frodo's  mind, it  began to  burn, and kindled to a  silver flame, a  minute
heart of dazzling light, as though Edrendil  had himself come down  from the
high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow. The darkness receded
from it until it seemed to shine in the  centre of a globe of  airy crystal,
and the hand that held it sparkled with white fire.
Frodo gazed  in  wonder at this marvellous  gift  that  he  had so long
carried, not guessing its full  worth and potency. Seldom had  he remembered
it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for
fear of its revealing  light.      Aiya Edrendil Elenion Ancalima!             he cried, and
