can feel something looking at us.'
They had not gone  more than a  few yards  when from behind them came a
sound,  startling and horrible in  the  heavy  padded  silence: a  gurgling,
bubbling noise, and  a  long  venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing
could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring, waiting for they did not
know what.
`It's  a trap!' said Sam, and he  laid his hand upon  the  hilt  of his
sword; and  as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it
came. 'I  wish  old  Tom was near us  now!' he  thought.  Then  as he stood,
darkness  about him and a  blackness of  despair and  anger in his heart. it
seemed  to him that he saw a  light:  a light in his mind, almost unbearably
bright at first, as a sun-ray to the eyes of one long hidden in a windowless
pit. Then  the light became colour: green,  gold, silver, white. Far off, as
in  a  little  picture drawn  by  elven-fingers  he  saw  the Lady Galadriel
standing on the  grass  in  Lurien,  and gifts  were  in her hands.               And you,
Ring-bearer     , he  heard her say,  remote  but clear        , for you  I have prepared
this .
The bubbling hiss  drew nearer,  and there  was a  creaking as  of some
great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on
before it. 'Master, master!' cried Sam, and the  life and  urgency came back
into his voice. 'The Lady's  gift! The star-glass! A light  to you  in  dark
places, she said it was to be. The star-glass! '
`The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly
comprehending.  `Why  yes! Why had  I forgotten it?                  A  light when all  other
lights go out!    And now indeed light alone can help us.'
Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held  aloft the  Phial
of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as  a rising star  struggling
in heavy earthward  mists,  and then as its power waxed,  and hope  grew  in
Frodo's  mind, it  began to  burn, and kindled to a  silver flame, a  minute
heart of dazzling light, as though Edrendil  had himself come down  from the
high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow. The darkness receded
from it until it seemed to shine in the  centre of a globe of  airy crystal,
and the hand that held it sparkled with white fire.
Frodo gazed  in  wonder at this marvellous  gift  that  he  had so long
carried, not guessing its full  worth and potency. Seldom had  he remembered
it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for
fear of its revealing  light.      Aiya Edrendil Elenion Ancalima!             he cried, and
knew  not what he had spoken; for it seemed that another voice spoke through
his, clear, untroubled by the foul air of the pit.
But other  potencies  there are in  Middle-earth, powers of night,  and
they are  old and strong. And She that  walked in the darkness had heard the
Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time, and she had not heeded it,
and it did  not daunt her now. Even as Frodo spoke he  felt  a great  malice
bent upon him, and a deadly regard considering him. Not far down the tunnel,
between them  and the  opening where  they  had reeled and stumbled, he  was
aware of eyes  growing visible, two great clusters  of many-windowed eyes --
the  coming menace was unmasked at last.  The radiance of the star-glass was
broken and thrown back from their thousand  facets, but behind the glitter a
pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within, a flame kindled in some deep
pit of  evil thought. Monstrous and  abominable eyes they were, bestial  and
yet filled with purpose  and with  hideous delight, gloating over their prey
trapped beyond all hope of escape.
Frodo  and  Sam, horror-stricken, began slowly to back away,  their own
gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as they backed so
the eyes  advanced. Frodo's hand wavered, and slowly the Phial drooped. Then
suddenly,  released from  the  holding spell to run  a little while  in vain
panic for the amusement of the eyes, they both turned and fled together; but
even as they ran Frodo looked back and saw with terror that at once the eyes
came leaping up behind. The stench of death was like a cloud about him.
'Stand! stand! ' he cried desperately. `Running is no use.'
Slowly the eyes crept nearer.
`Galadriel! ' he called, and  gathering his  courage  he  lifted up the
Phial once more. The eyes  halted. For a moment  their regard relaxed, as if
some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo's heart flamed  within him, and
without thinking what he did, whether it was folly or despair or courage, he
took the Phial in  his left  hand,  and  with his right hand drew his sword.
Sting flashed out, and the sharp elven-blade  sparkled in the silver  light,
but at  its edges a  blue fire  flicked. Then holding the star aloft and the
bright sword advanced,  Frodo,  hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily down to
meet the eyes.
They wavered. Doubt  came into them as the light approached. One by one
they dimmed,  and  slowly they drew back. No brightness so  deadly  had ever
afflicted  them  before. From sun  and  moon and star  they  had  been  safe
underground,  but now a star  had descended  into  the  very earth. Still it
approached, and the eyes began to quail. One by one they all went dark; they
turned  away, and a great bulk,  beyond  the light's reach,  heaved its huge
shadow in between. They were gone.
'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind,  his own  sword drawn
and ready. 'Stars  and glory!  But the Elves would make a song  of  that, if
ever they heard of it! And may I live  to tell them and hear them sing.  But
don't go  on, master. Don't go down to that den! Now's our only chance.  Now
let's get out of this foul hole!'
And  so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for
as they  went the  floor  of  the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride
they climbed higher  above  the stenches  of  the  unseen lair, and strength
returned  to  limb and  heart.  But still the hatred of  the  Watcher lurked
behind  them, blind for a while,  perhaps,  but undefeated,  still  bent  on
death. And  now there came  a  flow of air  to meet them, cold and thin. The
opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning for
a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and  then in amazement they
staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked  with some barrier, but not
of  stone: soft  and a  little  yielding  it  seemed,  and  yet  strong  and
impervious; air filtered through, hut not a  glimmer of any light. Once more
they charged and were hurled back.
Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and  before him he  saw a greyness
which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce  and did not illuminate,
as  if it  were  a  shadow that  being cast  by  no  light,  no  light could
dissipate. Across the  width and height of the  tunnel a  vast web was spun,
orderly as the web of some huge spider,  but  denser-woven  and far greater,
and each thread was as thick as rope.
Sam  laughed grimly.  `Cobwebs! '  he said. `Is that all?  Cobwebs! But
what a spider! Have at 'em, down with 'em! '
In a fury he  hewed at  them with his  sword,  but  the thread  that he
struck did  not break.  It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked
bowstring,  turning the blade and tossing up both sword and arm. Three times
Sam struck with all  his  force, and  at last  one single cord  of  all  the
countless  cords snapped and twisted, curling and whipping through  the air.
One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in pain, starting back and
drawing his hand across his mouth.
`It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. `What's to be
done? Have those eyes come back? '
