approached, and the eyes began to quail. One by one they all went dark; they
turned  away, and a great bulk,  beyond  the light's reach,  heaved its huge
shadow in between. They were gone.
'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind,  his own  sword drawn
and ready. 'Stars  and glory!  But the Elves would make a song  of  that, if
ever they heard of it! And may I live  to tell them and hear them sing.  But
don't go  on, master. Don't go down to that den! Now's our only chance.  Now
let's get out of this foul hole!'
And  so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for
as they  went the  floor  of  the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride
they climbed higher  above  the stenches  of  the  unseen lair, and strength
returned  to  limb and  heart.  But still the hatred of  the  Watcher lurked
behind  them, blind for a while,  perhaps,  but undefeated,  still  bent  on
death. And  now there came  a  flow of air  to meet them, cold and thin. The
opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning for
a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and  then in amazement they
staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked  with some barrier, but not
of  stone: soft  and a  little  yielding  it  seemed,  and  yet  strong  and
impervious; air filtered through, hut not a  glimmer of any light. Once more
they charged and were hurled back.
Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and  before him he  saw a greyness
which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce  and did not illuminate,
as  if it  were  a  shadow that  being cast  by  no  light,  no  light could
dissipate. Across the  width and height of the  tunnel a  vast web was spun,
orderly as the web of some huge spider,  but  denser-woven  and far greater,
and each thread was as thick as rope.
Sam  laughed grimly.  `Cobwebs! '  he said. `Is that all?  Cobwebs! But
what a spider! Have at 'em, down with 'em! '
In a fury he  hewed at  them with his  sword,  but  the thread  that he
struck did  not break.  It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked
bowstring,  turning the blade and tossing up both sword and arm. Three times
Sam struck with all  his  force, and  at last  one single cord  of  all  the
countless  cords snapped and twisted, curling and whipping through  the air.
One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in pain, starting back and
drawing his hand across his mouth.
`It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. `What's to be
done? Have those eyes come back? '
`No, not  to be seen,' said  Frodo.  `But  I still  feel  that they are
looking at me,  or  thinking about me: making some  other plan,  perhaps. If
this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.'
`Trapped in the end!  ' said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above
weariness and despair. `Gnats  in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite  that
Gollum and bite him quick! '
'That would not help us now,' said Frodo. `Come! Let us see what  Sting
can  do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines
of  Beleriand where it was forged.  But you must be the  guard and hold back
the eyes. Here,  take  the  star-glass.  Do  not be afraid. Hold  it  up and
watch!'
Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey  net, and hewed it  with a wide
sweeping stroke,  drawing  the  bitter  edge  swiftly  across  a  ladder  of
close-strung cords, and  at  once  springing  away. The  blue-gleaming blade
shore through them like a scythe through grass, and they  leaped and writhed
and then hung loose. A great rent was made.
Stroke  after  stroke he dealt, until at last  all the  web within  his
reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil
in the incoming wind. The trap was broken.
`Come! ' cried Frodo. `On! On! ' Wild joy at their escape from the very
mouth  of despair suddenly filled  all his mind. His head whirled as  with a
draught of potent wine. He sprang out, shouting as he came.
It seemed light in that  dark land to his eyes  that had passed through
the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and the last
hours of a sombre day were passing; the red glare of Mordor had died away in
sullen gloom. Yet it seemed to Frodo that he looked upon a morning of sudden
hope. Almost he had reached  the  summit of the  wall. Only  a little higher
now. The Cleft,  Cirith  Ungol, was before him, a dim  notch  in  the  black
ridge, and the horns of rock darkling  in  the sky on either side.  A  short
race, a sprinter's course and he would be through!
`The pass,  Sam! ' he  cried, not heeding the shrillness of  his voice,
that  released  from  the choking airs of the  tunnel  rang out now high and
wild. 'The  pass! Run, run, and we'll be  through-through before any one can
stop us! '
Sam came  up  behind as fast as he could  urge his legs; but glad as he
was  to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on  glancing back  at
the dark  arch of the tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some  shape beyond his
imagining,  spring out in  pursuit. Too little did he or  his master know of
the craft of Shelob. She had many exits from her lair.
There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider-form, even such as
once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under
the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror  in Doriath, and so
came to L®thien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight
long
ago. How Shelob came there, flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out  of the
Dark  Years  few tales  have come. But still she was  there, who  was  there
before Sauron, and before the first  stone of Barad-dyr; and she served none
but herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and grown fat with
endless  brooding on her  feasts,  weaving  webs of shadow;  for all  living
things  were  her  food,  and her  vomit  darkness.  Far and wide her lesser
broods, bastards  of the miserable mates, her own offspring,  that she slew,
spread from  glen to glen, from the Ephel D®ath to the eastern hills, to Dol
Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But none could  rival her, Shelob the
Great, last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world.
Already,  years before, Gollum had beheld her, Smjagol  who  pried into
all dark  holes, and in past days he had  bowed  and worshipped her, and the
darkness of  her evil will  walked through  all  the ways of  his  weariness
beside him, cutting  him off from light and from regret. And he had promised
to bring  her food. But her lust was  not his lust. Little  she  knew of  or
cared for towers, or  rings, or  anything devised by mind  or hand, who only
desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of life.
alone,  swollen  till  the  mountains  could no longer  hold her up and  the
darkness could not contain her.
But that  desire  was yet far  away, and long  now had she been hungry,
lurking  in  her den, while the power of  Sauron grew, and light and  living
things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley was dead, and  no Elf
or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs. Poor  food  and  wary. But she must
eat, and however busily  they delved new winding passages from  the pass and
from their tower, ever she found  some way to snare them. But she lusted for
sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her.
`We'll see, we'll see,'  he  said often to himself, when the evil  mood
was on him, as he walked the  dangerous road from  Emyn Muil to Morgul
Vale,
'we'll see. It may well be, O yes, it may well be  that when She throws away
