imagining,  spring out in  pursuit. Too little did he or  his master know of
the craft of Shelob. She had many exits from her lair.
There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider-form, even such as
once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under
the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror  in Doriath, and so
came to L®thien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight
long
ago. How Shelob came there, flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out  of the
Dark  Years  few tales  have come. But still she was  there, who  was  there
before Sauron, and before the first  stone of Barad-dyr; and she served none
but herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and grown fat with
endless  brooding on her  feasts,  weaving  webs of shadow;  for all  living
things  were  her  food,  and her  vomit  darkness.  Far and wide her lesser
broods, bastards  of the miserable mates, her own offspring,  that she slew,
spread from  glen to glen, from the Ephel D®ath to the eastern hills, to Dol
Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But none could  rival her, Shelob the
Great, last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world.
Already,  years before, Gollum had beheld her, Smjagol  who  pried into
all dark  holes, and in past days he had  bowed  and worshipped her, and the
darkness of  her evil will  walked through  all  the ways of  his  weariness
beside him, cutting  him off from light and from regret. And he had promised
to bring  her food. But her lust was  not his lust. Little  she  knew of  or
cared for towers, or  rings, or  anything devised by mind  or hand, who only
desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of life.
alone,  swollen  till  the  mountains  could no longer  hold her up and  the
darkness could not contain her.
But that  desire  was yet far  away, and long  now had she been hungry,
lurking  in  her den, while the power of  Sauron grew, and light and  living
things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley was dead, and  no Elf
or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs. Poor  food  and  wary. But she must
eat, and however busily  they delved new winding passages from  the pass and
from their tower, ever she found  some way to snare them. But she lusted for
sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her.
`We'll see, we'll see,'  he  said often to himself, when the evil  mood
was on him, as he walked the  dangerous road from  Emyn Muil to Morgul
Vale,
'we'll see. It may well be, O yes, it may well be  that when She throws away
the bones  and the empty garments, we  shall find it, we  shall  get it, the
Precious, a reward for poor Smjagol who brings nice food. And we'll save the
Precious, as we promised. O yes.  And when we've  got  it  safe, then She'll
know  it,  O  yes,  then we'll  pay  Her back,  my precious. Then  we'll pay
everyone back! '
So he thought in an inner chamber of  his cunning, which he still hoped
to hide from  her,  even when he  had come  to her  again and had bowed  low
before her while his companions slept.
And as for Sauron: he  knew where she lurked. It pleased  him that  she
should dwell there hungry but unabated in  malice,  a more  sure  watch upon
that  ancient  path into his land than any  other  that his skill could have
devised. And Orcs, they were useful  slaves, but he  had them in  plenty. If
now and again Shelob caught them to stay  her  appetite, she was welcome: he
could spare them. And sometimes as  a man may cast a dainty to  his cat (                     his
cat  he calls her, but she owns him not) Sauron would send her prisoners that
he had no better uses for: he would have them driven to her hole, and report
brought back to him of the play she made.
So  they  both lived, delighting in  their  own devices,  and feared no
assault, nor wrath,  nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had any  fly
escaped from Shelob's webs, and the greater now was her rage and hunger.
But  nothing of this evil which they had stirred  up against  them  did
poor Sam  know, except that a  fear  was growing on him, a menace  which  he
could not see; and such a weight  did it  become that it was a burden to him
to run, and his feet seemed leaden.
Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master
was in a fey mood  running  heedlessly to meet them. Turning  his  eyes away
from the shadow behind and the deep  gloom  beneath the cliff upon his left,
he looked  ahead, and he saw two things  that increased his  dismay.  He saw
that the sword  which  Frodo still held unsheathed was glittering  with blue
flame; and he saw that though the sky behind was now dark. still the  window
in the tower was glowing red.
`Orcs! '  he muttered. `We'll never rush  it  like  this.  There's Orcs
about, and  worse than Orcs.' Then  returning  quickly to his  long habit of
secrecy, he closed  his  hand about the precious Phial  which he still bore.
Red  with his own living blood  his  hand  shone for  a moment, and then  he
thrust  the revealing light deep into  a pocket near his breast and drew his
elven-cloak about him.  Now he tried  to  quicken his pace.  His master  was
gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on like a
shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world.
Hardly had  Sam hidden the light  of  the star-glass  when she came.  A
little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing  from a black hole
of  shadow under the cliff, the most loathly  shape that he had ever beheld,
horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but
huger than  the great hunting beasts, and more terrible than they because of
the evil  purpose  in her remorseless eyes.  Those  same  eyes  that  he had
thought daunted and defeated, there  they were lit with a fell light  again,
clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and behind her short
stalk-like neck was her huge swollen body,  a vast bloated bag, swaying  and
sagging  between  her legs; its great  bulk was black,  blotched  with livid
marks, but  the belly underneath  was pale  and  luminous  and  gave forth a
stench. Her legs were bent, with great  knobbed joints high  above her back,
and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg's end  there was
a claw.
As soon as she had  squeezed her  soft  squelching  body and its folded
limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a  horrible speed,
now running on her creaking legs, now making a sudden bound. She was
between
Sam  and his master. Either she did  not see Sam, or she avoided him for the
moment as  the bearer of the  light` and fixed all her intent upon one prey,
upon Frodo,  bereft of  his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet
of his  peril. Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was  swifter;  in a few  leaps she
would have him.
Sam gasped and gathered  all his  remaining breath  to shout. 'Look out
behind!  ' he yelled.  'Look  out  master!  I'm' -- but suddenly his cry was
stifled.
A long clammy hand went over his mouth and  another caught  him  by the
neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg.  Taken off  his guard he
toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker.
`Got him! ' hissed Gollum in his ear. `At  last, my precious, we've got
him, yes, the nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She'll get the other. O yes,
Shelob will get him,  not Smjagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all.
But he's got you, you nassty filthy little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck.
Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was
in  deadly  peril, gave  to Sam  a sudden violence and strength that was far
