gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on like a
shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world.
Hardly had  Sam hidden the light  of  the star-glass  when she came.  A
little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing  from a black hole
of  shadow under the cliff, the most loathly  shape that he had ever beheld,
horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but
huger than  the great hunting beasts, and more terrible than they because of
the evil  purpose  in her remorseless eyes.  Those  same  eyes  that  he had
thought daunted and defeated, there  they were lit with a fell light  again,
clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and behind her short
stalk-like neck was her huge swollen body,  a vast bloated bag, swaying  and
sagging  between  her legs; its great  bulk was black,  blotched  with livid
marks, but  the belly underneath  was pale  and  luminous  and  gave forth a
stench. Her legs were bent, with great  knobbed joints high  above her back,
and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg's end  there was
a claw.
As soon as she had  squeezed her  soft  squelching  body and its folded
limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a  horrible speed,
now running on her creaking legs, now making a sudden bound. She was
between
Sam  and his master. Either she did  not see Sam, or she avoided him for the
moment as  the bearer of the  light` and fixed all her intent upon one prey,
upon Frodo,  bereft of  his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet
of his  peril. Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was  swifter;  in a few  leaps she
would have him.
Sam gasped and gathered  all his  remaining breath  to shout. 'Look out
behind!  ' he yelled.  'Look  out  master!  I'm' -- but suddenly his cry was
stifled.
A long clammy hand went over his mouth and  another caught  him  by the
neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg.  Taken off  his guard he
toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker.
`Got him! ' hissed Gollum in his ear. `At  last, my precious, we've got
him, yes, the nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She'll get the other. O yes,
Shelob will get him,  not Smjagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all.
But he's got you, you nassty filthy little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck.
Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was
in  deadly  peril, gave  to Sam  a sudden violence and strength that was far
beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit, as he
thought him.  Not Gollum  himself  could have twisted  more quickly  or more
fiercely. His hold on Sam's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged
forward
again, trying to tear away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in
his hand, and on his  left arm,  hanging by  its thong, was Faramir's staff.
Desperately  he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum  was too quick.
His long right arm shot out, and he  grabbed  Sam's wrist:  his fingers were
like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward, till
with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground; and all
the while Gollum's other hand was tightening on Sam's throat.
Then Sam played his last trick. With all his  strength  he  pulled away
and got his feet firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs against the
ground and with his whole force hurled himself backwards.
Not  expecting  even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell  over with
Sam on top, and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in  his stomach.
A sharp hiss came out  of him, and  for a second his hand upon  Sam's throat
loosened;  but his  fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam  tore  himself
forward  and  away,  and stood up, and then  quickly he wheeled away  to his
right,  pivoted on the  wrist held by Gollum.  Laying hold of the staff with
his  left hand,  Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on
Gollum's outstretched arm, just below the elbow.
With a squeal Gollum let go. Then  Sam  waded in; not waiting to change
the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick as  a snake
Gollum slithered  aside. and the stroke aimed at his head  fell  across  his
back. The staff  cracked and broke.  That was  enough for him. Grabbing from
behind  was an old game of his,  and  seldom  had he failed in it.  But this
time,  misled by spite,  he  had made the  mistake  of speaking and gloating
before he had  both hands on his  victim's  neck. Everything  had gone wrong
with  his beautiful plan,  since that horrible  light  had  so  unexpectedly
appeared in the darkness. And now he was face to face with a furious  enemy,
little less than his own size. This fight was not for him. Sam  swept up his
sword from the ground and raised it. Gollum squealed, and springing aside on
to all fours, he  jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before Sam could
reach him, he was off, running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel.
Sword in  hand  Sam  went  after him.  For the  moment he had forgotten
everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to kill Gollum.
But before he could overtake him, Gollum  was gone. Then  as the  dark  hole
stood before him and the stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder
the thought of Frodo  and the monster  smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round,
and rushed wildly up the path, calling and calling his master's name. He was
too late. So far Gollum's plot had succeeded.
