longer  ones. At all costs we must  keep  you away from the                  Golden Perch.       We
want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?'
'I  will go  along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of  private
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).
'Then  if we are going to toil  through bog and briar, let's  go  now!'
said Pippin.
It was  already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds
were  beginning  to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain.
The hobbits scrambled down a steep  green  bank and  plunged into the  thick
trees below. Their course  had been chosen to  leave Woodhall to their left,
and  to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side
of  the  hills,  until they reached the flats  beyond. Then they  could make
straight  for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.
He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it  had
appeared. There were no paths  in the  undergrowth, and they did not  get on
very  fast.  When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a
stream  running  down from  the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with  steep
slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the
line they had chosen. They could  not jump over it, nor indeed get across it
at  all without  getting wet, scratched, and muddy.  They  halted, wondering
what to do. 'First check!' said Pippin, smiling grimly.
Sam Gamgee  looked back.  Through an opening  in  the trees he caught a
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down.
'Look!'  he said, clutching  Frodo by the  arm. They all looked, and on
the edge high above  them they saw against the sky a horse  standing. Beside
it stooped a black figure.
They  at once gave  up any  idea of going back. Frodo led  the way, and
plunged quickly into the  thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said to
Pippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but  we
got under  cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear
anything coming?'
They  stood still,  almost holding  their breath as  they listened; but
there was  no sound  of pursuit. 'I  don't fancy  he  would try bringing his
horse down that bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he  knows we came down it.  We
had better be going on.'
Going  on was  not altogether easy.  They had packs  to carry,  and the
bushes and  brambles were reluctant to  let  them through. They were cut off
from the wind by  the ridge behind, and the air  was still  and stuffy. When
they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired
and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in
which they  were  going.  The banks of  the stream sank,  as it reached  the
levels and  became broader  and shallower,  wandering off towards the Marish
and the River.
'Why,  this  is  the Stock-brook!' said Pippin. 'If we are going to try
and get back on to our course, we must cross at once and bear right.'
They waded  the  stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown
and treeless, on the  further side. Beyond that they came again to a belt of
trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here  and there an elm tree or  an
ash. The ground was fairly level, and  there was little undergrowth; but the
trees were loo close for them to see far  ahead.  The leaves blew upwards in
sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky.
Then the wind died away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged
along
as fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through  thick  drifts  of
old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered  and trickled. They did not
talk, but kept glancing back, and from side to side.
After  half an hour Pippin said: 'I hope  we  have not turned  too much
towards the south, and are not walking longwise through this wood! It is not
a very broad belt --I should  have said  no more than a mile at the widest -
and we ought to have been through it by now.'
'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won't
mend  matters. Let us keep on as we  are going! I am not sure that I want to
come out into the open yet.'
They  went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun gleamed
out of ragged clouds  again and the rain  lessened. It was now past mid-day,
and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its
leaves  though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the  ground at  its
feel  was fairly dry and sheltered. When  they came to make their meal, they
found that  the  Elves had  filled their bottles  with  a  clear drink, pale
golden in colour: it had the scent of a honey made  of many flowers, and was
wonderfully  refreshing. Very soon they  were  laughing, and snapping  their
fingers at rain, and at Black Riders.  The last few  miles, they felt, would
soon be behind them.
Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam
and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly:
Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go
To heal my heart and drown my woe.
Rain may fall and wind may blow,
And many miles be still to go,
But under a tall tree I will lie,
And let the clouds go sailing by.
Ho! Ho! Ho!      they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo
sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came  down the wind, like  the  cry of
some evil  and  lonely  creature.  It  rose and fell, and  ended  on  a high
piercing  note. Even as  they sat and stood, as  if suddenly frozen,  it was
answered by another  cry, fainter and further off, but no less  chilling  to
the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in
the leaves.
'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speak
lightly, but quavering a little. 'If it was a bird, it was  one that I never
heard in the Shire before.'
'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or  a signal --
there were words in that cry, though  I  could not catch them. But no hobbit
has such a voice.'
No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no
one  spoke of them. They  were now reluctant either to  stay  or go  on; but
sooner or  later they had got to  get across the  open country to the Ferry,
and  it was best to go  sooner  and  in daylight.  In a few moments they had
shouldered their packs again and were off.
Before long the wood came  to a  sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretched
before them. They now saw that  they had, in  fact, turned too much  to  the
south.  Away over  the  flats  they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury
across the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from
the edge of the trees,  they set off  across  the  open  as  quickly as they
could.
At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of  the wood. Far back
behind them stood the  high place  where  they had  breakfasted.  Frodo half
expected to see the small distant  figure of  a horseman on  the ridge  dark
against  the sky; but there was  no sign of  one. The  sun escaping from the
breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining
