But before he could overtake him, Gollum  was gone. Then  as the  dark  hole
stood before him and the stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder
the thought of Frodo  and the monster  smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round,
and rushed wildly up the path, calling and calling his master's name. He was
too late. So far Gollum's plot had succeeded.
Chapter 10. The Choices of Master Samwise
Frodo was lying face upward  on the ground and the monster  was bending
over  him, so intent  upon her victim  that she took  no heed of Sam and his
cries, until  he was close at  hand. As he rushed up he  saw that Frodo  was
already  bound  in  cords, wound about him from ankle to  shoulder,  and the
monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his
body away.
On  the near side of him lay, gleaming on  the ground, his elven-blade,
where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait to  wonder what
was to be  done, or whether he was brave, or loyal, or filled with rage.  He
sprang  forward with a yell, and seized his master's sword in his left hand.
Then he charged.  No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world
of beasts; where  some  desperate  small creature  armed with  little  teeth
alone,  will  spring  upon a tower of horn and  hide that  stands above  its
fallen mate.
Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned
slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was
aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she  had known in  countless
years,  the shining sword  bit upon her  foot  and shore away  the claw. Sam
sprang in, inside the arches of  her legs, and  with a quick upthrust of his
other hand stabbed at  the clustered eyes upon her lowered  head. One  great
eye went dark.
Now  the miserable creature was right under her, for the  moment out of
the reach of her  sting and of her claws.  Her vast belly was above him with
its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury
held for  one more blow, and  before she could sink upon him, smothering him
and all his little impudence of courage, he  slashed  the bright elven-blade
across her with desperate strength.
But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save only her
eyes.  Knobbed  and pitted  with corruption  was her  age-old hide, but ever
thickened from within with  layer on layer of evil  growth. The blade scored
it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any
strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should  forge the steel or the hand
of Beren or of T®rin wield it. She yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up
the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled
from  the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge  bulk down  on
him
again.  Too  soon.  For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping  his own
sword, with both hands he  held the  elven-blade  point upwards, fending off
that ghastly roof; and  so  Shelob, with  the driving force of her own cruel
will, with  strength greater than  any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a
bitter  spike.  Deep,  deep it pricked, as Sam was  crushed  slowly  to  the
ground.
No such anguish  had  Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in  all
her long  world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor
the most savage Orc  entrapped, had ever thus  endured  her, or set blade to
her beloved flesh. A shudder  went through her.  Heaving up again, wrenching
away  from the  pain,  she  bent her writhing limbs  beneath  her and sprang
backwards in a convulsive leap.
Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses  reeling in the
foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the
mist before his eyes he was  aware  dimly of Frodo's face  and stubbornly he
fought to  master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon
him.  Slowly  he raised his head and saw her, only  a few paces away, eyeing
him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom,  and a green ooze trickling from
below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed
upon
the ground,  the great bows of her legs quivering, as she  gathered  herself
for another spring-this time to crush  and sting to death: no little bite of
poison to  still the struggling of  her meat; this time  to slay and then to
rend.
Even  as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing  his death in her
eyes,  a  thought came  to him, as  if some remote voice had  spoken. and he
fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and
hard  and  solid  it seemed to  his touch  in a phantom world of horror, the
Phial of Galadriel.
'Galadriel!  ' he said  faintly, and  then he heard voices far off  but
clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved
shadows of the  Shire, and  the music  of the Elves as  it came  through his
sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond.
Gilthoniel A Elbereth!
