the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled
from  the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge  bulk down  on
him
again.  Too  soon.  For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping  his own
sword, with both hands he  held the  elven-blade  point upwards, fending off
that ghastly roof; and  so  Shelob, with  the driving force of her own cruel
will, with  strength greater than  any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a
bitter  spike.  Deep,  deep it pricked, as Sam was  crushed  slowly  to  the
ground.
No such anguish  had  Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in  all
her long  world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor
the most savage Orc  entrapped, had ever thus  endured  her, or set blade to
her beloved flesh. A shudder  went through her.  Heaving up again, wrenching
away  from the  pain,  she  bent her writhing limbs  beneath  her and sprang
backwards in a convulsive leap.
Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses  reeling in the
foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the
mist before his eyes he was  aware  dimly of Frodo's face  and stubbornly he
fought to  master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon
him.  Slowly  he raised his head and saw her, only  a few paces away, eyeing
him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom,  and a green ooze trickling from
below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed
upon
the ground,  the great bows of her legs quivering, as she  gathered  herself
for another spring-this time to crush  and sting to death: no little bite of
poison to  still the struggling of  her meat; this time  to slay and then to
rend.
Even  as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing  his death in her
eyes,  a  thought came  to him, as  if some remote voice had  spoken. and he
fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and
hard  and  solid  it seemed to  his touch  in a phantom world of horror, the
Phial of Galadriel.
'Galadriel!  ' he said  faintly, and  then he heard voices far off  but
clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved
shadows of the  Shire, and  the music  of the Elves as  it came  through his
sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond.
Gilthoniel A Elbereth!
And then his tongue was loosed and  his voice cried in a language which
he did not know:
A Elbereth Gilthoniel
o menel palan-diriel,
le nallon sn di'nguruthos!
A tiro nin, Fanuilos!
And  with  that  he staggered  to  his feet and was Samwise the hobbit,
Hamfast's son, again.
`Now come, you filth!' he cried. `You've hurt my master, you brute, and
you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on,
and taste it again!'
As  if his indomitable spirit had set  its potency in motion, the glass
blazed  suddenly like a white torch in his  hand. It flamed like a star that
leaping from the firmament sears  the  dark  air with  intolerable light. No
such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob's face before. The beams
of it entered into her wounded head  and scored it with unbearable pain, and
the  dreadful  infection of light  spread  from  eye to  eye. She  fell back
beating  the air with her  forelegs, her  sight blasted by inner lightnings,
her  mind  in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and
began to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind.
Sam came  on. He was reeling like a drunken man,  but he came  on.  And
Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered  as she  tried
to  hasten from him. She  reached  the hole,  and  squeezing down, leaving a
trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke
at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the ground.
Shelob was  gone; and  whether she lay  long in her  lair, nursing  her
malice  and her misery, and  in slow years of darkness  healed  herself from
within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun
once more her dreadful snares in the glens of the Mountains of  Shadow, this
tale does not tell.
Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening  of the Nameless Land  fell
upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master.
'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not  speak. As he had run
forward, eager, rejoicing  to be  free,  Shelob  with hideous speed had come
behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale,
and heard no voice. and did not move.
`Master, dear  master! ' said Sam, and through  a long  silence waited.
listening in vain.
Then as quickly as he could he  cut away the binding cords and laid his
head upon  Frodo's  breast and to his mouth, but  no stir of life  could  he
find, nor  feel  the  faintest flutter of  the  heart. Often  he chafed  his
master's hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all were cold.
`Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone!  It's  your
Sam calling. Don't go  where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  O wake up,
Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!'
Then anger surged over hint,  and he ran  about his master's body in  a
rage,  stabbing the air,  and smiting the  stones, and shouting  challenges.
Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him
in the  dusk.  And  suddenly  he  saw that he was  in the  picture  that was
revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lurien: Frodo with a pale face
lying fast asleep under  a great  dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had  thought
then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And  as he  said it, as if
the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue
of the face grew livid green.
And  then black despair came down  on him, and Sam bowed to the ground,
and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into  his heart, and he
knew no more.
When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about
him; but for how many  minutes or  hours the world had  gone dragging on  he
could not  tell. He was still in  the  same place,  and still his master lay
beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled  nor  the earth fallen  into
ruin.
'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said.  `Did I come all this way
with him for  nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking
words
that at the time he  did not  understand  himself, at the beginning of their
journey:    I have something to do before the end. I must see  it through, sir,
if you understand      .
`But what can I do? Not leave  Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on  the  top of
the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for  a
moment
doubt and fear  shook him. `Go on?  Is  that what I've  got to do? And leave
him?'
Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body,
