listening in vain.
Then as quickly as he could he  cut away the binding cords and laid his
head upon  Frodo's  breast and to his mouth, but  no stir of life  could  he
find, nor  feel  the  faintest flutter of  the  heart. Often  he chafed  his
master's hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all were cold.
`Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone!  It's  your
Sam calling. Don't go  where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  O wake up,
Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!'
Then anger surged over hint,  and he ran  about his master's body in  a
rage,  stabbing the air,  and smiting the  stones, and shouting  challenges.
Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him
in the  dusk.  And  suddenly  he  saw that he was  in the  picture  that was
revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lurien: Frodo with a pale face
lying fast asleep under  a great  dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had  thought
then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And  as he  said it, as if
the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue
of the face grew livid green.
And  then black despair came down  on him, and Sam bowed to the ground,
and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into  his heart, and he
knew no more.
When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about
him; but for how many  minutes or  hours the world had  gone dragging on  he
could not  tell. He was still in  the  same place,  and still his master lay
beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled  nor  the earth fallen  into
ruin.
'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said.  `Did I come all this way
with him for  nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking
words
that at the time he  did not  understand  himself, at the beginning of their
journey:    I have something to do before the end. I must see  it through, sir,
if you understand      .
`But what can I do? Not leave  Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on  the  top of
the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for  a
moment
doubt and fear  shook him. `Go on?  Is  that what I've  got to do? And leave
him?'
Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body,
and folded his cold hands upon his breast,  and wrapped his cloak about him;
and he laid  his own sword at one side, and the staff that Faramir had given
at the other.
'If I'm  to  go on,' he  said,  `then  I must take your sword,  by your
leave, Mr. Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the  old
king in the barrow; and you've got your beautiful mithril coat from  old Mr.
Bilbo. And  your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it to me and I'll  need
it, for I'll be  always in the dark now. It's too good  for me, and the Lady
gave it  to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do                you   understand, Mr. Frodo?
I've got to go on.'
But he could not  go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could
not release it. And time went  by and  still he knelt, holding  his master's
hand, and in his heart keeping a debate.
Now he tried to find strength to tear himself  away and go  on a lonely
journey -- for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger would bear him down
all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then
Gollum would die in a corner. But that was not what he had set out to do. It
would  not be  worth while to leave his master for  that. It would not bring
him back. Nothing would. They had better both be dead together. And that too
would be a lonely journey.
He  looked on  the bright point of the sword. He thought  of the places
behind where there  was a black brink  and an  empty  fall into nothingness.
There  was no  escape  that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve.
That was not what he had set  out to do. 'What am  I to  do then? ' he cried
again,  and now he seemed  plainly to know the hard  answer:                    see it through    .
Another lonely journey, and the worst.
`What? Me, alone, go  to the Crack of Doom and all? ' He quailed still,
but the resolve grew. `What?          Me   take  the Ring from       him ? The Council gave it
to him.'
But the answer came at  once: `And the  Council gave him companions, so
that  the errand  should not fail.  And you are the last of all the Company.
The errand must not fail.'
`I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. `I wish old Gandalf was hare or
somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind?  I'm sure to go wrong.
And it's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.'
'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been  put forward. And as
for  not  being the right and proper person,  why,  Mr. Frodo wasn't as  you
might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.'
`Ah well, I must make up my  own mind. I  will  make it up. But I'll be
sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over.
'Let  me see  now:  if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that
Thing's on him,  well, the Enemy  will  get it. And that's the end of all of
us, of Lorien, and  Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to
lose,  or it'll  be the end anyway.  The war's begun, and  more than  likely
things are all going the Enemy's way  already. No  chance to go back with It
and  get advice or permission.  No, it's sit here till they come and kill me
over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.'  He drew a deep breath.
'Then take It, it is! '
He stooped. Very gently he undid  the clasp at the neck and slipped his
hand inside Frodo's tunic;  then with his other  hand raising the  head,  he
kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over  it.  And  then the
head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and
by that  more than by all  other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo
had died and laid aside the Quest.
`Good-bye, master,  my dear! ' he  murmured. 'Forgive  your Sam.  He'll
come back to  this spot when  the job's done  -- if  he manages it. And then
he'll  not leave  you again. Rest  you quiet  till  I  come; and may no foul
creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish,
I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye! '
And then he bent his own  neck and put the chain upon  it, and  at once
his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of  the Ring, as if a great
stone  had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became  less, or
new strength grew in him, he raised his  head, and then with a  great effort
got to his feet and found that  he could walk and bear his burden. And for a
moment he lifted up the Phial  and looked down at his master,  and the light
burned gently  now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and
in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an
elvish beauty,  as of one who has  long  passed the  shadows. And  with  the
bitter comfort of that last sight Sam  turned and hid the light and stumbled
on into the growing dark.
He  had not far to go.  The  tunnel was some way  behind;  the  Cleft a
couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in  the dusk` a
deep rut worn in  ages of  passage,  running  now gently up in a long trough
with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came  to a
