might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.'
`Ah well, I must make up my  own mind. I  will  make it up. But I'll be
sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over.
'Let  me see  now:  if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that
Thing's on him,  well, the Enemy  will  get it. And that's the end of all of
us, of Lorien, and  Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to
lose,  or it'll  be the end anyway.  The war's begun, and  more than  likely
things are all going the Enemy's way  already. No  chance to go back with It
and  get advice or permission.  No, it's sit here till they come and kill me
over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.'  He drew a deep breath.
'Then take It, it is! '
He stooped. Very gently he undid  the clasp at the neck and slipped his
hand inside Frodo's tunic;  then with his other  hand raising the  head,  he
kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over  it.  And  then the
head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and
by that  more than by all  other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo
had died and laid aside the Quest.
`Good-bye, master,  my dear! ' he  murmured. 'Forgive  your Sam.  He'll
come back to  this spot when  the job's done  -- if  he manages it. And then
he'll  not leave  you again. Rest  you quiet  till  I  come; and may no foul
creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish,
I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye! '
And then he bent his own  neck and put the chain upon  it, and  at once
his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of  the Ring, as if a great
stone  had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became  less, or
new strength grew in him, he raised his  head, and then with a  great effort
got to his feet and found that  he could walk and bear his burden. And for a
moment he lifted up the Phial  and looked down at his master,  and the light
burned gently  now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and
in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an
elvish beauty,  as of one who has  long  passed the  shadows. And  with  the
bitter comfort of that last sight Sam  turned and hid the light and stumbled
on into the growing dark.
He  had not far to go.  The  tunnel was some way  behind;  the  Cleft a
couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in  the dusk` a
deep rut worn in  ages of  passage,  running  now gently up in a long trough
with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came  to a
long flight of broad shallow steps. Now the orc-tower  was right  above him,
frowning black, and in it the red eye  glowed. Now he was hidden in the dark
shadow under it. He was coming to the top of  the steps and was in the Cleft
at last.
'I've made up  my  mind,' he kept saying to himself.  But  he  had not.
Though  he  had done his best  to  think it  out,  what  he  was  doing  was
altogether against the grain  of his nature.  `Have  I  got it  wrong? '  he
muttered. `What ought I to have done? '
As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the
actual summit,  before  he looked  at last on the  path descending into  the
Nameless Land. he turned. For a moment, motionless  in intolerable doubt, he
looked back. He could still see, like a small blot in  the gathering  gloom,
the mouth  of the tunnel; and he thought he could see or  guess where  Frodo
lay. He fancied there was a glimmer on the ground  down there, or perhaps it
was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at that high stony place where
all his life had fallen in ruin.
'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, `to go back and
find him! '  Then  at last he turned to  the  road in front and took  a  few
steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken.
Only a few steps; and now only a  few more and  he would be going  down
and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly  he heard cries
and voices. He stood still as  stone.  Orc-voices. They were behind him  and
before him.  A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts:  Orcs were coming up
to  the  Cleft from the  far side, from  some entry to  the tower,  perhaps.
Tramping feet and shouts behind. He  wheeled round. He saw small red lights,
torches, winking away below there as they  issued  from the tunnel. At  last
the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught.
Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was
very near. In a minute they would reach the top and be on  him. He had taken
too long in making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape,
or save himself, or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought
or  decision. He simply found himself drawing  out the  chain and taking the
Ring in his hand.  The head of  the  orc-company appeared in the Cleft right
before him. Then he put it on.
The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an  hour
of thought. At once he was aware that  hearing was sharpened while sight was
dimmed, but otherwise than in  Shelob's  lair. All things about him now were
not dark but vague; while he himself was there in  a grey hazy world, alone,
like a small black solid rock and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was
like an orb of hot gold. He did not feel invisible at  all, but horribly and
uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him.
He heard the  crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul
Vale;  and down away under the rock the bubbling misery  of Shelob, groping,
lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the
cries of the Orcs  as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in
his ears, the crash of the feet  and the  rending clamour of the Orcs before
him.  He  shrank  against the cliff. But  they marched  up  like  a  phantom
company,  grey distorted  figures in a mist, only  dreams of  fear with pale
flames in their hands. And they passed him  by. He  cowered, trying to creep
away into some cranny and to hide.
He listened.  The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had
sighted one another,  and  both parties were now hurrying  and  shouting. He
heard them both clearly, and he understood what they  said. Perhaps the Ring
gave understanding of tongues,  or simply  understanding, especially  of the
servants  of  Sauron  its maker, so that if he gave heed,  he understood and
translated  the thought  to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in
power  as it approached the places of its forging; but one  thing it did not
confer, and that  was courage. At present Sam  still thought only of hiding,
of lying low till all  was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He  could
not tell how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.
'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? '
'Orders, you lubber. And what are  you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking
up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? '
'Orders to  you.  I'm in command  of this pass.  So speak civil. What's
your report? '
'Nothing.'
`Hai!  hai! yoi!'  A yell  broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The
Orcs lower down  had  suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the
others.
`Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in  the road. A spy, a spy! '
There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.
With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They
had
seen  his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make
