not dark but vague; while he himself was there in  a grey hazy world, alone,
like a small black solid rock and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was
like an orb of hot gold. He did not feel invisible at  all, but horribly and
uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him.
He heard the  crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul
Vale;  and down away under the rock the bubbling misery  of Shelob, groping,
lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the
cries of the Orcs  as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in
his ears, the crash of the feet  and the  rending clamour of the Orcs before
him.  He  shrank  against the cliff. But  they marched  up  like  a  phantom
company,  grey distorted  figures in a mist, only  dreams of  fear with pale
flames in their hands. And they passed him  by. He  cowered, trying to creep
away into some cranny and to hide.
He listened.  The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had
sighted one another,  and  both parties were now hurrying  and  shouting. He
heard them both clearly, and he understood what they  said. Perhaps the Ring
gave understanding of tongues,  or simply  understanding, especially  of the
servants  of  Sauron  its maker, so that if he gave heed,  he understood and
translated  the thought  to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in
power  as it approached the places of its forging; but one  thing it did not
confer, and that  was courage. At present Sam  still thought only of hiding,
of lying low till all  was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He  could
not tell how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.
'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? '
'Orders, you lubber. And what are  you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking
up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? '
'Orders to  you.  I'm in command  of this pass.  So speak civil. What's
your report? '
'Nothing.'
`Hai!  hai! yoi!'  A yell  broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The
Orcs lower down  had  suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the
others.
`Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in  the road. A spy, a spy! '
There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.
With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They
had
seen  his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make
the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He  sprang up. He flung the Quest
and all his decisions away, and fear and doubt with them.  He knew now where
his place was  and had been: at  his master's side, though what he  could do
there  was not clear. Back  he  ran down the  steps, down the  path  towards
Frodo.
`How many are there?'  he  thought. `Thirty or forty  from the tower at
least, and  a  lot more than  that  from down below, I guess. How many can I
kill before they get  me? They'll see the flame of  the  sword, as soon as I
draw it, and they'll get me  sooner or later. I wonder if any song will ever
mention it: How Samwise  fell  in  the High Pass and made  a wall of  bodies
round his master. No,  no song. Of course not, for the Ring'll be found, and
there'll be  no more songs. I can't help it. My place is  by Mr. Frodo. They
must understand that  --  Elrond  and the Council, and  the  great Lords and
Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans  have gone wrong. I can't be their
Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.'
But the  Orcs were  out  of his dim sight now. He  had  had no  time to
consider himself, but now he  realized  that he was  weary, weary almost  to
exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He was  too slow. The
path seemed miles long. Where had they all got to in the mist?
There they were  again!  A good way  ahead still. A cluster of  figures
round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and
that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt.
'Come on, Sam!  ' he said, `or you'll be too late  again.' He  loosened
the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then--
There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted
from the ground. 'Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up! '
Then a  voice shouted: `Now off! The quick way. Back to  the Undergate!
She'll  not  trouble us  tonight  by  all  the signs.'  The  whole  band  of
orc-figures  began  to move. Four in the middle were carrying a body high on
their shoulders. `Ya hoi! '
They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up.
Still he laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in. Those
with the  burden  went  first, and  behind them  there  was a  good  deal of
struggling  and  jostling. Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue
in his  wavering hand, but they did not see it. Even as  he came panting up,
the last of them vanished into the black hole.
For a moment he stood, gasping,  clutching his breast. Then he drew his
sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears.  'Curse
the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.
It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if
he  had  stepped out of  a thin mist into  a heavier fog. His  weariness was
growing but his will  hardened  all the more. He thought  he  could  see the
light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch
them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this  tunnel  they  knew well.; for in
spite of Shelob they were forced  to use it  often as the swiftest  way from
the Dead City over the mountains. In  what far-off time  the main tunnel and
the great round  pit had been  made, where Shelob had  taken up her abode in
ages past. they did not  know: but many byways they  had  themselves  delved
about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro
on  the business of their masters.  Tonight they  did not intend to  go  far
down. but  were  hastening to find  a side-passage  that  led back  to their
watch-tower on  the cliff. Must of  them were gleeful,  delighted with  what
they had found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after the
fashion of their kind. Sam heard the  noise  of their harsh voices, flat and
hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices from among all the
rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The  captains of the  two parties
seemed to be bringing up the rear, debating as they went.
'Can't you  stop your rabble  making such a racket, Shagrat? '  grunted
the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.'
`Go on, Gorbag! Yours are  making  more than half the noise,'  said the
other.  `But let the  lads play! No need to worry about  Shelob for a bit, I
reckon. She's sat on a nail, it  seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't
you see: a nasty  mess all the way  back to  that cursed crack  of  hers? If
we've stopped it once, we've stopped it  a  hundred times. So let 'em laugh.
And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugb®rz wants.'
'Lugb®rz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me,
but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? '
'Don't know till we've had a look.'
'Oho! So they  haven't  told you what to expect? They don't tell us all
they  know, do  they? Not by  half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top
Ones can.'
`Sh, Gorbag!'  Shagrat's voice  was  lowered, so  that  even  with  his
strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just  catch  what was said. 'They
may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as
