sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears.  'Curse
the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.
It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if
he  had  stepped out of  a thin mist into  a heavier fog. His  weariness was
growing but his will  hardened  all the more. He thought  he  could  see the
light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch
them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this  tunnel  they  knew well.; for in
spite of Shelob they were forced  to use it  often as the swiftest  way from
the Dead City over the mountains. In  what far-off time  the main tunnel and
the great round  pit had been  made, where Shelob had  taken up her abode in
ages past. they did not  know: but many byways they  had  themselves  delved
about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro
on  the business of their masters.  Tonight they  did not intend to  go  far
down. but  were  hastening to find  a side-passage  that  led back  to their
watch-tower on  the cliff. Must of  them were gleeful,  delighted with  what
they had found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after the
fashion of their kind. Sam heard the  noise  of their harsh voices, flat and
hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices from among all the
rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The  captains of the  two parties
seemed to be bringing up the rear, debating as they went.
'Can't you  stop your rabble  making such a racket, Shagrat? '  grunted
the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.'
`Go on, Gorbag! Yours are  making  more than half the noise,'  said the
other.  `But let the  lads play! No need to worry about  Shelob for a bit, I
reckon. She's sat on a nail, it  seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't
you see: a nasty  mess all the way  back to  that cursed crack  of  hers? If
we've stopped it once, we've stopped it  a  hundred times. So let 'em laugh.
And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugb®rz wants.'
'Lugb®rz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me,
but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? '
'Don't know till we've had a look.'
'Oho! So they  haven't  told you what to expect? They don't tell us all
they  know, do  they? Not by  half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top
Ones can.'
`Sh, Gorbag!'  Shagrat's voice  was  lowered, so  that  even  with  his
strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just  catch  what was said. 'They
may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as
not.  But there's no  doubt about it, they're troubled about something.  The
Nazgyl down below are, by your account; and Lugb®rz is too. Something
nearly
slipped.'
`Nearly, you say! ' said Gorbag.
`All right,' said Shagrat, `but we'll  talk of that later: Wait till we
get to the Under-way.  There's a place there where  we can talk a bit, while
the lads go on.'
Shortly  afterwards  Sam saw the  torches  disappear. Then there  was a
rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as  he could guess
the Orcs  had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo  and he  had
tried and found blocked. It was still blocked.
There  seemed to be a  great stone  in  the  way,  but the Orcs had got
through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were
still running  along, deeper and deeper into the mountain,  back towards the
tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some
foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and
he  threw himself against it, but it did not  yield. Then not far inside, or
so he thought,  he  heard the two captains' voices talking  again.  He stood
still  listening  for a little  hoping  perhaps  to learn something  useful.
Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and
he
could then slip in.
`No,  I  don't  know,' said  Gorbag's voice. `The messages  go  through
quicker  than anything could fly, as a rule. But I  don't  enquire how  it's
done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgyl give me the creeps. And they skin the
body off you as soon as look at you, and leave  you all cold in the  dark on
the  other side. But He likes 'em;  they're His favourites nowadays, so it's
no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in the city.'
`You should try being up here with Shelob for company,' said Shagrat.
'I'd like to try somewhere where there's  none of 'em. But the war's on
now, and when that's over things may be easier.'
`It's going well, they say.'
'They would.' grunted  Gorbag. `We'll  see. But anyway, if  it does  go
well,  there should  be  a lot more  room. What d'you  say?  -- if we get  a
chance, you and me'll slip  off  and set up somewhere on our  own with a few
trusty lads, somewhere  where there's good  loot nice and handy, and no  big
bosses.'
'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.'
`Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As
I  said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice  sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even
the  Biggest,  can  make mistakes. Something  nearly slipped you say. I say,
something     has   slipped. And we've got to  look out. Always the poor  Uruks to
put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't  love
us  any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done
too. But see here: when were you ordered out? '
`About an hour ago,  just  before you  saw us.  A message  came:                   Nazgyl
uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to  head of Stairs                    .
I came at once.'
'Bad business,'  said Gorbag.  `See  here  -- our Silent  Watchers were
uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out
for another  day, nor any message sent to Lugb®rz either: owing to the Great
Signal going up, and the High Nazgyl going off to the war, and all that. And
then they couldn't get Lugb®rz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.'
`The Eye  was busy elsewhere,  I  suppose,'  said Shagrat.  `Big things
going on away west, they say.'
'I daresay,' growled Gorbag.  `But in the meantime enemies  have got up
the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're  supposed to  keep watch, aren't
you, special orders or no? What are you for?'
`That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right.
We knew there were funny things going on.'
`Very funny! '
`Yes, very funny: lights  and  shouting and all. But Shelob was on  the
go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.'
`Her Sneak? What's that? '
`You  must  have  seen  him:  little thin  black  fellow; like a spider
himself, or perhaps more like a starved frog. He's  been  here  before. Came
out  of Lugb®rz the first time, years  ago,  and  we had word from High Up to
let  him pass.  He's been up the Stairs once  or twice since then, but we've
left him  alone: seems  to  have some  understanding with  Her  Ladyship.  I
suppose he's no good to eat:  she wouldn't  worry about words from High  Up.
But a  fine guard you keep in the valley:  he  was up here a day  before all
this racket. Early last  night we  saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her
Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good  enough for me, until the
