bosses.'
'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.'
`Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As
I  said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice  sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even
the  Biggest,  can  make mistakes. Something  nearly slipped you say. I say,
something     has   slipped. And we've got to  look out. Always the poor  Uruks to
put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't  love
us  any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done
too. But see here: when were you ordered out? '
`About an hour ago,  just  before you  saw us.  A message  came:                   Nazgyl
uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to  head of Stairs                    .
I came at once.'
'Bad business,'  said Gorbag.  `See  here  -- our Silent  Watchers were
uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out
for another  day, nor any message sent to Lugb®rz either: owing to the Great
Signal going up, and the High Nazgyl going off to the war, and all that. And
then they couldn't get Lugb®rz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.'
`The Eye  was busy elsewhere,  I  suppose,'  said Shagrat.  `Big things
going on away west, they say.'
'I daresay,' growled Gorbag.  `But in the meantime enemies  have got up
the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're  supposed to  keep watch, aren't
you, special orders or no? What are you for?'
`That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right.
We knew there were funny things going on.'
`Very funny! '
`Yes, very funny: lights  and  shouting and all. But Shelob was on  the
go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.'
`Her Sneak? What's that? '
`You  must  have  seen  him:  little thin  black  fellow; like a spider
himself, or perhaps more like a starved frog. He's  been  here  before. Came
out  of Lugb®rz the first time, years  ago,  and  we had word from High Up to
let  him pass.  He's been up the Stairs once  or twice since then, but we've
left him  alone: seems  to  have some  understanding with  Her  Ladyship.  I
suppose he's no good to eat:  she wouldn't  worry about words from High  Up.
But a  fine guard you keep in the valley:  he  was up here a day  before all
this racket. Early last  night we  saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her
Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good  enough for me, until the
message came.  I thought  her  Sneak had  brought her a toy. or  that  you'd
perhaps  sent  her a present,  a  prisoner  of  war  or  something. I  don't
interfere  when  she's playing.  Nothing gets by  Shelob  when  she's on the
hunt.'
'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you  I'm
not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs,                 did  get by. It cut her web
and got clean out of the hole. That's something to think about! '
`Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she? '
` Got  him? Got    who  ? This little fellow? But if  he was the only one then
she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And
if Lugb®rz wanted him,          you'd   have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there
was more than one.'
At this point Sam began to listen  more attentively and pressed his ear
against the stone.
'Who cut the cords she'd  put round  him, Shagrat? Same one  as cut the
web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I
reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? '
Shagrat made no reply.
`You may  well put  your  thinking cap on,  if you've  got one. It's no
laughing matter. No  one, no one  has ever stuck a  pin in Shelob before, as
you  should  know well enough.  There's no  grief in that; but think-there's
someone  loose hereabouts  as is more dangerous than any other  damned rebel
that ever  walked since the bad old times, since the  Great Siege. Something
has   slipped.'
`And what is it then? ' growled Shagrat.
`By all the  signs, Captain  Shagrat, I'd say there's  a  large warrior
loose,  Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe:
and he's loose in your bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny
indeed! ' Gorbag spat. Sam smiled grimly at this description of himself.
'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy  view.'  said  Shagrat. 'You can
read the signs how you like, but there  may be  other  ways to explain them.
Anyhow. I've  got watchers  at every point, and  I'm  going to deal with one
thing at a  time. When  I've had  a look at the fellow we               have   caught,  then
I'll begin to worry
1cb2
about something else.'
`It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag.
'He may have had nothing to  do  with the real mischief. The big fellow with
the sharp sword doesn't seem to have thought him  worth much  anyhow -- just
left him lying: regular elvish trick.'
`We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go  and have a look
at the prisoner!
`What  are  you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first.
If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.'
'Now, now,' growled  Shagrat. 'I  have my orders. And it's more than my
belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em.          Any   trespasser found by the  guard is
to  be held at the  tower. Prisoner is  to be stripped. Full description  of
every  article, garment, weapon,  letter,  ring. or trinket is to be sent to
Lugb®rz at once, and to  Lugb®rz             only  . And  the prisoner is to be  kept safe
and intact,  under pain  of death for every member  of  the guard, until  He
sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough,  and that's what I'm  going  to
do.'
'Stripped, eh? ' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? '
`No,  none of that. He's for Lugb®rz,  I tell you. He's wanted safe and
whole.'
'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion
now. What Lugb®rz will do with such stuff I can't guess. He might as well go
in the pot.'
'You  fool,'  snarled Shagrat.  'You've been talking very  clever,  but
there's a lot you don't  know, though most other folk do. You'll be  for the
pot or for Shelob, if you don't take  care. Carrion! Is that all you know of
Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords,  she's after meat. She  doesn't eat
dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! '
Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if  the whole dark world
was turning upside  down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but
even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware
of the  comment: 'You  fool, he  isn't dead, and your heart  knew  it. Don't
trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part  of you. The  trouble with
you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? ' Fur the
moment nothing, but to prop himself against the  unmoving  stone and listen,
listen to the vile orc-voices.
`Garn!'  said  Shagrat. 'She's got more than  one  poison.  When  she's
