about something else.'
`It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag.
'He may have had nothing to  do  with the real mischief. The big fellow with
the sharp sword doesn't seem to have thought him  worth much  anyhow -- just
left him lying: regular elvish trick.'
`We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go  and have a look
at the prisoner!
`What  are  you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first.
If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.'
'Now, now,' growled  Shagrat. 'I  have my orders. And it's more than my
belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em.          Any   trespasser found by the  guard is
to  be held at the  tower. Prisoner is  to be stripped. Full description  of
every  article, garment, weapon,  letter,  ring. or trinket is to be sent to
Lugb®rz at once, and to  Lugb®rz             only  . And  the prisoner is to be  kept safe
and intact,  under pain  of death for every member  of  the guard, until  He
sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough,  and that's what I'm  going  to
do.'
'Stripped, eh? ' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? '
`No,  none of that. He's for Lugb®rz,  I tell you. He's wanted safe and
whole.'
'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion
now. What Lugb®rz will do with such stuff I can't guess. He might as well go
in the pot.'
'You  fool,'  snarled Shagrat.  'You've been talking very  clever,  but
there's a lot you don't  know, though most other folk do. You'll be  for the
pot or for Shelob, if you don't take  care. Carrion! Is that all you know of
Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords,  she's after meat. She  doesn't eat
dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! '
Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if  the whole dark world
was turning upside  down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but
even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware
of the  comment: 'You  fool, he  isn't dead, and your heart  knew  it. Don't
trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part  of you. The  trouble with
you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? ' Fur the
moment nothing, but to prop himself against the  unmoving  stone and listen,
listen to the vile orc-voices.
`Garn!'  said  Shagrat. 'She's got more than  one  poison.  When  she's
hunting, she just gives 'em a dab in the neck and  they go as limp as  boned
fish, and then she has her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost
him for days.  Then we found him in a corner;  hanging up he was, but he was
wide awake  and glaring. How we laughed! She'd  forgotten him, maybe, but
we
didn't  touch him-no  good interfering with Her. Nar  -- this  little filth,
he'll wake up, in  a few hours; and  beyond feeling a  bit sick for  a  hit,
he'll be  all right. Or would  be,  if Lugb®rz  would let him alone. And  of
course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.'
'And what's going to happen to him,' laughed Gorbag. 'We can tell him a
few stories at  any rate, if we can't do anything else. I don't suppose he's
ever been in lovely Lugb®rz, so he may  like to know what to expect. This is
going to be more funny than I thought. Let's go!'
`There's going to be no fun, I tell  you,' said Shagrat.  'And he's got
to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.'
`AII  right! But if I  were you, I'd catch the  big one  that's  loose,
before you send in any report to Lugb®rz. It  won't sound too pretty  to say
you've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.'
The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He
was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. `I got it all
wrong!  ' he cried. `I knew I  would. Now they've  got him, the  devils! the
filth! Never leave your master, never,  never: that was my right rule. And I
knew  it in my heart. May  I be forgiven!  Now I've got to get  back to him.
Somehow, somehow! '
He  drew his sword again and  beat on the stone with the  hilt, but  it
only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, blazed so brightly now  that
he could see dimly  in its light. To his surprise he noticed  that the great
block was shaped like a heavy door, and  was less than twice his own height.
Above it was a  dark blank  space between the top and the  low  arch of  the
opening.  It was probably only meant to be a stop against the  intrusion  of
Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt  beyond the reach  of
her cunning. With  his  remaining  strength  Sam leaped and caught the  top,
scrambled up, and dropped;  and  then he ran  madly, sword blazing in  hand,
round a bend and up a winding tunnel.
The news  that his master was still alive roused him  to a  last effort
beyond thought  of weariness. He could not see anything  ahead. for this new
passage twisted and turned constantly; but  he thought  he was  catching the
two Orcs up: their  voices were growing  nearer again. Now they seemed quite
close.
`That's what I'm going  to do,'  said Shagrat in angry tones.  'Put him
right up in the top chamber.'
`What for? ' growled Gorbag. `Haven't you any lock-ups down below? '
`He's  going out of harm's way,  I  tell  you,' answered Shagrat. 'See?
He's  precious.  I  don't trust  all  my lads,  and  none of yours;  nor you
neither, when you're mad for fun. He's going where I want him, and where you
won't come,  if you  don't keep civil. Up to the top,  I  say. He'll be safe
there.'
`Will  he?'  said Sam. 'You're  forgetting the great big elvish warrior
that's loose!' And with that he raced  round  the last corner, only to  find
that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the Ring gave him,
he had misjudged the distance.
The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could  see  them now,
black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an
incline;  and  at  the  end, wide open,  were  great  double doors,  leading
probably to deep  chambers far below the high horn of the tower. Already the
Orcs  with their burden  had  passed inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing
near the gate.
Sam  heard a burst  of hoarse singing, blaring of horns  and banging of
gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold.
Sam yelled  and brandished Sting, but his little  voice was  drowned in
the tumult. No one heeded him.
The  great  doors slammed to. Boom.  The bars  of iron fell  into place
inside. Clang.  The gate was  shut.  Sam  hurled  himself against the bolted
brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He  was out in the darkness.
Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy.
