Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam
and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly:
Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go
To heal my heart and drown my woe.
Rain may fall and wind may blow,
And many miles be still to go,
But under a tall tree I will lie,
And let the clouds go sailing by.
Ho! Ho! Ho!      they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo
sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came  down the wind, like  the  cry of
some evil  and  lonely  creature.  It  rose and fell, and  ended  on  a high
piercing  note. Even as  they sat and stood, as  if suddenly frozen,  it was
answered by another  cry, fainter and further off, but no less  chilling  to
the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in
the leaves.
'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speak
lightly, but quavering a little. 'If it was a bird, it was  one that I never
heard in the Shire before.'
'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or  a signal --
there were words in that cry, though  I  could not catch them. But no hobbit
has such a voice.'
No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no
one  spoke of them. They  were now reluctant either to  stay  or go  on; but
sooner or  later they had got to  get across the  open country to the Ferry,
and  it was best to go  sooner  and  in daylight.  In a few moments they had
shouldered their packs again and were off.
Before long the wood came  to a  sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretched
before them. They now saw that  they had, in  fact, turned too much  to  the
south.  Away over  the  flats  they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury
across the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from
the edge of the trees,  they set off  across  the  open  as  quickly as they
could.
At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of  the wood. Far back
behind them stood the  high place  where  they had  breakfasted.  Frodo half
expected to see the small distant  figure of  a horseman on  the ridge  dark
against  the sky; but there was  no sign of  one. The  sun escaping from the
breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining
brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But the
land  became  steadily  more  tame and  well-ordered.  Soon they  came  into
well-tended fields and meadows: there were  hedges  and gates  and dikes for
drainage. Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an  ordinary corner  of
the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The  line  of  the River grew
nearer; and the Black Riders began  to seem  like phantoms of  the woods now
left far behind.
They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and  came to a stout
gate.  Beyond it a  rutted  lane ran between low well-laid hedges towards  a
distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped.
'I know these fields and this gate!' he said. 'This is Bamfurlong,  old
Farmer Maggot's land. That's his farm away there in the trees.'
'One trouble after another!' said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed
as if Pippin  had declared the lane was the slot leading to  a dragon's den.
The others looked at him in surprise.
'What's wrong with  old Maggot?' asked Pippin.  'He's a good  friend to
all the  Brandy  bucks.  Of course he's  a terror to trespassers, and  keeps
ferocious  dogs - but after all, folk down here are near the border and have
to be more on their guard.'
'I  know,' said  Frodo. 'But all the same,' he added with  a shamefaced
laugh,  'I am  terrified of  him and his dogs. I have avoided  his  farm for
years and  years. He  caught me  several times trespassing after  mushrooms,
when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat  me, and
then took  me  and showed  me to his dogs. "See, lads," he  said, "next time
this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat  him. Now see him off!"
They chased me all the way to the Ferry. I have never got over the  fright -
though I  daresay  the beasts knew their business and  would not really have
touched me.'
Pippin laughed. 'Well, it's time you  made it up. Especially if you are
coming back to live  in Buckland. Old Maggot is really  a stout fellow -  if
you leave his mushrooms alone. Let's get into the lane and then we shan't be
trespassing. If we meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry's,
and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.'
They went along the lane, until they saw the  thatched roofs of a large
house and farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead. The Maggots,
and
the Puddifoots of  Stock, and most of  the  inhabitants of  the Marish, were
house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall
all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the  wall into the
lane.
Suddenly  as they drew nearer  a terrific baying and barking broke out,
and a loud voice was heard shouting: 'Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!'
Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked  on a few paces. The gate
opened and  three  huge dogs came  pelting  out  into  the  lane, and dashed
towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but
Sam shrank  against the wall, while  two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the
three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling.
Through the gate there now appeared  a broad  thick-set  hobbit  with a
round  red  face. 'Hallo! Hallo!  And who may you  be, and what  may you  be
wanting?' he asked.
'Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!' said Pippin.
The farmer looked at  him closely. 'Well, if it  isn't Master Pippin  -
Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin.
'It's a long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know
you. I was just going out to  set my dogs  on  any strangers. There are some
funny things going  on today. Of course, we do get queer folk  wandering  in
these parts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his  head.  'But
this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes  on. He won't cross
my land without leave a second time, not if I can stop it.'
'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin.
'Then you haven't  seen him?' said  the  farmer. 'He  went up the  lane
towards the  causeway not  a  long while back. He  was a funny  customer and
asking funny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass
the news more comfortable. I've a  drop  of good ale on tap, if you and your
friends are willing, Mr. Took.'
It seemed plain that the  farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do
it in his own time and  fashion, so they all accepted  the invitation. 'What
about the dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously.
The farmer laughed.  'They  won't harm you - not unless I  tell 'em to.
Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!'  To the relief of Frodo and
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.
Pippin introduced  the other two to the farmer. 'Mr. Frodo Baggins,' he
said. 'You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.' At the
