hasten. Time is  short.  See! The beacons of Gondor are  alight, calling for
aid. War  is  kindled.  See,  there is the  fire  on Amon  Don, and flame on
Eilenach;  and  there they go speeding  west:  Nardol,  Erelas,  Min-Rimmon,
Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.'
But Shadowfax  paused in  his stride, slowing  to  a  walk, and then he
lifted up his head and neighed. And out of the  darkness the answering neigh
of other  horses came; and  presently the  thudding of hoofs was heard,  and
three riders swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished
into the West. Then Shadowfax gathered himself together and sprang away,
and
the night flowed over him like a roaring wind.
Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling
him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built
on the tops  of  outlying hills along both borders  of the great  range, and
maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness
to bear  his errand-riders to  Rohan in the North,  or  to Belfalas  in  the
South. 'It is long since the beacons of the North  were lit,' he said;  'and
in the ancient days of  Gondor they were not needed, for  they had the Seven
Stones.' Pippin stirred uneasily.
'Sleep  again, and do  not be  afraid!' said Gandalf. 'For you are  not
going like Frodo to  Mordor, but  to Minas Tirith, and there you  will be as
safe as you can  be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or  the Ring is
taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.'
'You do not comfort me,' said Pippin, but nonetheless  sleep crept over
him. The last  thing that he remembered before he fell into deep dream was a
glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like floating isles above the clouds
as they caught the light of the westering moon. He wondered where Frodo was,
and if he was already in Mordor, or if he was dead; and he did not know that
Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the
coming of the day.
Pippin woke  to  the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night
of journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again,
and chill grey mists were about them.  Shadowfax stood  steaming with sweat,
but he held his neck proudly and showed  no sign of weariness. Many tall men
heavily cloaked  stood beside him, and behind them in the mist loomed a wall
of stone. Partly ruinous  it seemed, but already before the night was passed
the sound  of  hurried labour  could  be heard:  beat  of hammers,  clink of
trowels,  and the creak of wheels. Torches and flares glowed dully here  and
there in the fog. Gandalf was speaking  to the men that  barred his way, and
as he listened Pippin became aware that he himself was being discussed.
'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader  of the men, 'and
you know the pass-words of the  Seven  Gates and are free to go forward. But
we do not know your companion. What  is he?  A dwarf out of the mountains
in
the North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be
mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.'
'I will vouch  for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. 'And
as  for valour,  that  cannot be computed by stature. He has  passed through
more  battles and  perils than you have,  Ingold, though  you  be twice  his
height; and  he comes  now  from the storming of Isengard,  of which we bear
tidings,  and great weariness is  on him, or  I would wake him. His name  is
Peregrin, a very valiant man.'
'Man?' said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed.
'Man!' cried Pippin,  now  thoroughly roused.  'Man! Indeed not! I am a
hobbit and no more valiant  than I am a man,  save perhaps  now and again by
necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!'
'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold.  'But what
is a hobbit?'
'A Halfling,' answered Gandalf. 'Nay,  not the one that was spoken of,'
he added seeing  the  wonder  in the  men's  faces. 'Not  he, yet one of his
kindred.'
'Yes, and one  who  journeyed  with him,' said Pippin. 'And  Boromir of
your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the
last he was slain defending me from many foes.'
'Peace!'  said Gandalf.  'The news of that grief should have  been told
first to the father.'
'It  has  been  guessed  already,' said  Ingold;  'for there have  been
strange portents here  of late. But pass  on now  quickly! For  the  Lord of
Minas Tirith  will be eager to see any that bear the  latest tidings of  his
son, be he man or--'
'Hobbit,' said Pippin.  'Little  service  can I offer to your lord, but
what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.'
'Fare you well!' said  Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and
he  passed through a narrow gate in the wall. 'May you bring good counsel to
Denethor  in his need, and  to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold  cried.  'But you
come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.'
'Because I come seldom but  when my help  is needed,' answered Gandalf.
'And as for counsel, to you I would  say that you are over-late in repairing
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will  now be your best defence against the
storm that is at  hand - that and such  hope as  I  bring. For not  all  the
tidings that I  bring are  evil.  But leave your  trowels  and  sharpen your
swords!'
'The work will be finished ere evening,' said Ingold. 'This is the last
portion of  the wall  to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it
looks  towards our  friends of Rohan.  Do  you know aught of them? Will they
answer the summons, think you?'
'Yes,  they will come. But  they have fought many battles at your back.
This road and no road looks towards safety  any longer. Be vigilant! But for
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host  of foes coming  out of
Anurien
and no Riders of Rohan. And you may yet. Fare you well, and sleep not!'
Gandalf passed now into  the wide land  beyond the Rammas Echor. So the
men of Gondor  called the out  wall that they had  built with great  labour,
after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more
it ran from the  mountains' feet  and so back again, enclosing in its  fence
the fields of the Pelennor:  fair and fertile townlands  on  the long slopes
and terraces falling to the deep levels of the Anduin. At its furthest point
from the  Great Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall  was four leagues
distant, and there from a frowning bank  it overlooked the long flats beside
the river,  and men had  made it high and strong; for at  that point, upon a
walled causeway, the  road came in from  the fords and bridges  of Osgiliath
and passed  through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its  nearest
point the  wall was little more than one league from the  City, and that was
south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a  wide knee about the  hills of Emyn
Arnen in South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and  the out-wall rose  upon its
very  brink; and beneath  it lay  the quays and  landings of the Harlond for
craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.
The  townlands  were rich,  with  wide  tilth  and many  orchards,  and
homesteads there  were with oast  and garner, fold and byre, and  many rills
rippling through  the  green from the  highlands  down  to Anduin.  Yet  the
