Denethor  in his need, and  to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold  cried.  'But you
come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.'
'Because I come seldom but  when my help  is needed,' answered Gandalf.
'And as for counsel, to you I would  say that you are over-late in repairing
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will  now be your best defence against the
storm that is at  hand - that and such  hope as  I  bring. For not  all  the
tidings that I  bring are  evil.  But leave your  trowels  and  sharpen your
swords!'
'The work will be finished ere evening,' said Ingold. 'This is the last
portion of  the wall  to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it
looks  towards our  friends of Rohan.  Do  you know aught of them? Will they
answer the summons, think you?'
'Yes,  they will come. But  they have fought many battles at your back.
This road and no road looks towards safety  any longer. Be vigilant! But for
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host  of foes coming  out of
Anurien
and no Riders of Rohan. And you may yet. Fare you well, and sleep not!'
Gandalf passed now into  the wide land  beyond the Rammas Echor. So the
men of Gondor  called the out  wall that they had  built with great  labour,
after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more
it ran from the  mountains' feet  and so back again, enclosing in its  fence
the fields of the Pelennor:  fair and fertile townlands  on  the long slopes
and terraces falling to the deep levels of the Anduin. At its furthest point
from the  Great Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall  was four leagues
distant, and there from a frowning bank  it overlooked the long flats beside
the river,  and men had  made it high and strong; for at  that point, upon a
walled causeway, the  road came in from  the fords and bridges  of Osgiliath
and passed  through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its  nearest
point the  wall was little more than one league from the  City, and that was
south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a  wide knee about the  hills of Emyn
Arnen in South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and  the out-wall rose  upon its
very  brink; and beneath  it lay  the quays and  landings of the Harlond for
craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.
The  townlands  were rich,  with  wide  tilth  and many  orchards,  and
homesteads there  were with oast  and garner, fold and byre, and  many rills
rippling through  the  green from the  highlands  down  to Anduin.  Yet  the
herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part
of
the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the  City, or in the high
vales of  the  mountain-borders,  in Lossarnach,  or  further south  in fair
Lebennin with its five swift streams. There dwelt  a  hardy folk between the
mountains and the sea. They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood
was
mingled, and there were short  and swarthy  folk among them whose sires came
more from the forgotten men who  housed in  the  shadow  of the hills in the
Dark  Years  ere the coming of the kings. But  beyond,  in the great fief of
Belfalas, dwelt Prince Imrahil  in  his castle of Dol Amroth by the sea, and
he was of high blood,  and  his folk also, tall  men and proud with sea-grey
eyes.
Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the
sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a sea of mist,
rising  to a  bleak  shadow  in the  East;  but to his right great mountains
reared their heads, ranging  from the West  to a steep and sudden end, as if
in  the  making of the land the  River  had burst  through a great  barrier,
carving  out a mighty valley to be a  land  of battle and debate in times to
come. And there where the White Mountains of Ered Nimrais  came to their
end
he saw, as Gandalf had promised, the dark mass of Mount Mindolluin, the deep
purple  shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising
day. And upon its out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven walls
of stone  so  strong and  old that  it seemed to have been  not builded  but
carven by giants out of the bones of the earth.
Even  as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls  passed from  looming grey to
white, blushing faintly in  the dawn;  and suddenly the sun climbed over the
eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that  smote the face of the City. Then
Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower  of  Ecthelion, standing high  within  the
topmost walls' shone  out against the  sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl
and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle  glittered as if  it
were wrought of crystals;  and white  banners  broke and  fluttered from the
battlements in the morning breeze' and high and far he heard a clear ringing
as of silver trumpets.
So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate  of the Men of Gondor at
the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before them.
'Mithrandir!  Mithrandir!' men  cried. 'Now we know that  the  storm is
indeed nigh!'
'It is upon you,' said  Gandalf. 'I  have  ridden  on its wings. Let me
pass!  I  must come  to  your  Lord Denethor, while his  stewardship  lasts.
Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have
known.
Let me pass!'
Then men  fell back before the command of his voice  and questioned him
no further, though  they gazed in wonder  at the hobbit that sat before  him
and at the horse that bore him. For the people of  the City used horses very
little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by
the errand-riders of their  lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one  of the
great steeds of the  King  of  Rohan?  Maybe  the Rohirrim will come soon to
strengthen us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road.
For the  fashion  of  Minas Tirith was such that it was built on  seven
levels,  each  delved into the hill, and about each  was set a  wall, and in
each wall was a  gate. But the gates were not set in a line:  the Great Gate
in the City Wall was at  the  east  point of the circuit, but the next faced
half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the
paved  way that climbed towards  the Citadel turned  first this way and then
that across the face of  the hill. And each  time that it passed the line of
the  Great Gate it went through an  arched  tunnel, piercing a  vast pier of
rock whose  huge out-thrust bulk  divided in two all the circles of the City
save the first. For partly in  the  primeval shaping  of the hill, partly by
the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide
court behind the  Gate a  towering  bastion  of stone, its edge sharp  as  a
ship-keel facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the  topmost circle,
and there was crowned  by  a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might,
like mariners in a mountainous ship, look from  its peak sheer down upon the
Gate  seven  hundred  feet  below.  The entrance  to the Citadel also looked
eastward,  but  was delved in the  heart of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit
slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus  men reached  at last the High Court,
and the Place of the  Fountain before the feet of the  White Tower: tall and
shapely,  fifty fathoms from its  base to the pinnacle, where the banner  of
the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain.
A  strong citadel  it was indeed,  and  not to be taken  by  a  host of
enemies, if  there were any within that could hold weapons;  unless some foe
