'Mithrandir!  Mithrandir!' men  cried. 'Now we know that  the  storm is
indeed nigh!'
'It is upon you,' said  Gandalf. 'I  have  ridden  on its wings. Let me
pass!  I  must come  to  your  Lord Denethor, while his  stewardship  lasts.
Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have
known.
Let me pass!'
Then men  fell back before the command of his voice  and questioned him
no further, though  they gazed in wonder  at the hobbit that sat before  him
and at the horse that bore him. For the people of  the City used horses very
little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by
the errand-riders of their  lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one  of the
great steeds of the  King  of  Rohan?  Maybe  the Rohirrim will come soon to
strengthen us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road.
For the  fashion  of  Minas Tirith was such that it was built on  seven
levels,  each  delved into the hill, and about each  was set a  wall, and in
each wall was a  gate. But the gates were not set in a line:  the Great Gate
in the City Wall was at  the  east  point of the circuit, but the next faced
half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the
paved  way that climbed towards  the Citadel turned  first this way and then
that across the face of  the hill. And each  time that it passed the line of
the  Great Gate it went through an  arched  tunnel, piercing a  vast pier of
rock whose  huge out-thrust bulk  divided in two all the circles of the City
save the first. For partly in  the  primeval shaping  of the hill, partly by
the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide
court behind the  Gate a  towering  bastion  of stone, its edge sharp  as  a
ship-keel facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the  topmost circle,
and there was crowned  by  a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might,
like mariners in a mountainous ship, look from  its peak sheer down upon the
Gate  seven  hundred  feet  below.  The entrance  to the Citadel also looked
eastward,  but  was delved in the  heart of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit
slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus  men reached  at last the High Court,
and the Place of the  Fountain before the feet of the  White Tower: tall and
shapely,  fifty fathoms from its  base to the pinnacle, where the banner  of
the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain.
A  strong citadel  it was indeed,  and  not to be taken  by  a  host of
enemies, if  there were any within that could hold weapons;  unless some foe
could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin, and so come upon
the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain  mass. But
that shoulder, which rose to  the height of the fifth wall, was hedged  with
great ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung its western end;  and
in that  space stood the houses and  domed tombs of bygone kings  and lords,
for ever silent between the mountain and the tower.
Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and more
splendid  than  anything that he had dreamed of;  greater and  stronger than
Isengard, and far more beautiful.  Yet it was in truth falling year by  year
into decay; and already it lacked half the men that could have dwelt at ease
there. In  every street they passed  some  great house or  court  over whose
doors and arched gates were carved many fair letters  of strange and ancient
shapes: names Pippin  guessed of great men and kindreds that had once  dwelt
there;  and  yet now they were silent,  and no footsteps rang  on their wide
pavements, nor voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out  from
door or empty window.
At last they came out of  shadow to the seventh gate,  and the warm sun
that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien,
glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars, and the great arch  with
keystone  carven  in  the  likeness of a crowned and  kingly  head.  Gandalf
dismounted, for no horse was allowed in the Citadel,  and Shadowfax suffered
himself to be led away at the soft word of his master.
The Guards of the gate  were robed  in black, and  their helms  were of
strange  shape, high-crowned,  with long cheek-guards  close-fitting to  the
face,  and above the cheek-guards were set the white wings of sea-birds; but
the helms gleamed with a  flame of silver, for they were indeed  wrought  of
mithril  , heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon  the black surcoats were
embroidered in white a tree blossoming like  snow beneath a silver crown and
many-pointed  stars. This  was the livery of the heirs of  Elendil, and none
wore it now in all Gondor,  save the Guards of the Citadel  before the Court
of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown.
Already it  seemed that word of their coming had  gone before them: and
at once they were admitted,  silently, and without question. Quickly Gandalf
strode across  the white-paved court.  A  sweet fountain played there in the
morning sun,  and a  sward of bright green  lay about it; but in the  midst.
drooping over the pool,  stood  a dead  tree, and  the falling drops dripped
sadly from its barren and broken branches back into the clear water.
Pippin glanced at  it  as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful,
he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was  left in  this place where
everything else was well tended.
Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree.
The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into  his mind. And  then
he found himself at the doors of  the great hall beneath the gleaming tower;
and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door-wardens and entered the
cool echoing shadows of the house of stone.
They walked  down  a paved passage, long and  empty, and  as  they went
Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. 'Be careful of your  words, Master Peregrin!
This is  no time for  hobbit pertness. Thjoden is a kindly old man. Denethor
is of another  sort, proud and subtle,  a  man  of far  greater  lineage and
power, though  he is  not called a king. But he will  speak most to you, and
question you much, since you  can tell him  of his son Boromir. He loved him
greatly: too much  perhaps; and the more  so because they  were  unlike. But
under cover  of  this love he will think it easier to  learn what he witches
from you rather than  from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave
quiet  the matter of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due  time. And
say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.'
'Why  not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin  whispered. 'He meant to
come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.'
'Maybe,  maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely  to be
in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At
least he should come unheralded by us.'
Gandalf halted  before a  tall  door of  polished  metal. 'See,  Master
Pippin,  there  is no  time to instruct  you now in  the history of  Gondor;
though it might have been  better, if you  had learned something of it, when
you were  still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods  of the Shire.
Do as I bid! It  is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his
heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the  coming of one who  will, if
he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?'
'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed.
'Yes,' said  Gandalf.  'If you  have  walked all these days with closed
ears and mind asleep, wake up now!' He knocked on the door.
The door opened,  but no one could be  seen  to open it.  Pippin looked
into a great hall. It was  lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at  either
side, beyond  the rows of tall  pillars that upheld the  roof. Monoliths  of
