Pippin glanced at  it  as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful,
he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was  left in  this place where
everything else was well tended.
Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree.
The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into  his mind. And  then
he found himself at the doors of  the great hall beneath the gleaming tower;
and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door-wardens and entered the
cool echoing shadows of the house of stone.
They walked  down  a paved passage, long and  empty, and  as  they went
Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. 'Be careful of your  words, Master Peregrin!
This is  no time for  hobbit pertness. Thjoden is a kindly old man. Denethor
is of another  sort, proud and subtle,  a  man  of far  greater  lineage and
power, though  he is  not called a king. But he will  speak most to you, and
question you much, since you  can tell him  of his son Boromir. He loved him
greatly: too much  perhaps; and the more  so because they  were  unlike. But
under cover  of  this love he will think it easier to  learn what he witches
from you rather than  from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave
quiet  the matter of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due  time. And
say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.'
'Why  not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin  whispered. 'He meant to
come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.'
'Maybe,  maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely  to be
in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At
least he should come unheralded by us.'
Gandalf halted  before a  tall  door of  polished  metal. 'See,  Master
Pippin,  there  is no  time to instruct  you now in  the history of  Gondor;
though it might have been  better, if you  had learned something of it, when
you were  still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods  of the Shire.
Do as I bid! It  is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his
heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the  coming of one who  will, if
he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?'
'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed.
'Yes,' said  Gandalf.  'If you  have  walked all these days with closed
ears and mind asleep, wake up now!' He knocked on the door.
The door opened,  but no one could be  seen  to open it.  Pippin looked
into a great hall. It was  lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at  either
side, beyond  the rows of tall  pillars that upheld the  roof. Monoliths  of
black marble, they  rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of
beasts and leaves; and far above in  shadow  the wide  vaulting gleamed with
dull  gold, inset with  flowing traceries of  many colours. No  hangings nor
storied webs, nor  any things of woven stuff or  of wood, were to be seen in
that long solemn hall; but between the pillars there stood  a silent company
of tall images graven in cold stone.
Suddenly Pippin was  reminded  of  the hewn rocks of  Argonath, and awe
fell on him, as he looked down  that  avenue of kings  long dead. At the far
end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble
shaped like a crowned helm; behind  it was carved upon the wall and set with
gems an image of a tree  in flower. But the throne was empty. At the foot of
the dais, upon the lowest step which was broad and deep, there  was  a stone
chair,  black and unadorned, and on it sat an  old man gazing at his lap. In
his hand was a  white rod  with a  golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly
they paced the long floor towards him, until they stood three paces from his
footstool. Then Gandalf spoke.
'Hail, Lord  and Steward of Minas Tirith,  Denethor son of Ecthelion! I
am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.'
Then  the old  man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its proud
bones  and skin like ivory, and the long  curved nose between  the dark deep
eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragorn. 'Dark
indeed
is the hour,' said  the old  man, 'and  at such times you are  wont to come,
Mithrandir.  But though all  the  signs forebode that the  doom of Gondor is
drawing  nigh, less now to me is  that darkness than my own darkness. It has
been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?'
'It is,' said Gandalf. 'One  of the twain. The other is with Thjoden of
Rohan and may come hereafter.  Halflings  they are,  as you see, yet this is
not he of whom the omens spoke.'
'Yet  a  Halfling still,' said Denethor  grimly, 'and little love do  I
bear the name, since those  accursed words  came to trouble our counsels and
drew away my son on the  wild errand to his  death. My Boromir!  Now we
have
need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.'
'He would  have  gone,' said  Gandalf.  'Be not unjust  in your  grief!
Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was
a masterful man, and one  to take what he desired. I journeyed far  with him
and learned much of  his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news
of that ere we came?'
'I  have received  this,'  said Denethor, and laying  down his  rod  he
lifted from his lap the  thing that  he had been gazing at.  In each hand he
held up one half  of a great  horn cloven through the middle: a wild-ox horn
bound with silver.
'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin.
'Verily,'  said  Denethor. 'And in  my turn  I bore it, and so did each
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing
of the kings, since  Vorondil father  of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw
in the  far fields of Rhyn. I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches
thirteen  days ago, and the River brought  it to me, broken: it will wind no
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black
glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?'
'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be
so. Yes, I stood beside him,  as he blew the  horn. But  no help  came. Only
more orcs.'
'So,' said  Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there?
Tell me more! Why did no help  come? And how  did you escape, and yet he
did
not, so mighty a man as he was, and only orcs to withstand him?'
Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain  by
one arrow,'  he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by  many. When last I saw him
he sank  beside  a tree and plucked a black-feathered shaft  from  his side.
Then I swooned  and was made  captive. I saw him no more, and know  no
more.
But I honour his memory,  for he was very  valiant.  He died to save  us, my
kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by  the  soldiery  of  the
Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.'
Then Pippin looked the old man in  the eye, for pride stirred strangely
within  him, still stung  by  the scorn  and suspicion in that  cold  voice.
'Little service, no  doubt, will so great a lord of Men  think to  find in a
hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I  will offer
it,  in payment  of my  debt.'  Twitching  aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew
forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet.
A pale smile, like a gleam of  cold sun  on a winter's evening,  passed
over the old man's face; but he  bent his head and held out his hand, laying
