and learned much of  his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news
of that ere we came?'
'I  have received  this,'  said Denethor, and laying  down his  rod  he
lifted from his lap the  thing that  he had been gazing at.  In each hand he
held up one half  of a great  horn cloven through the middle: a wild-ox horn
bound with silver.
'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin.
'Verily,'  said  Denethor. 'And in  my turn  I bore it, and so did each
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing
of the kings, since  Vorondil father  of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw
in the  far fields of Rhyn. I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches
thirteen  days ago, and the River brought  it to me, broken: it will wind no
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black
glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?'
'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be
so. Yes, I stood beside him,  as he blew the  horn. But  no help  came. Only
more orcs.'
'So,' said  Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there?
Tell me more! Why did no help  come? And how  did you escape, and yet he
did
not, so mighty a man as he was, and only orcs to withstand him?'
Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain  by
one arrow,'  he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by  many. When last I saw him
he sank  beside  a tree and plucked a black-feathered shaft  from  his side.
Then I swooned  and was made  captive. I saw him no more, and know  no
more.
But I honour his memory,  for he was very  valiant.  He died to save  us, my
kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by  the  soldiery  of  the
Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.'
Then Pippin looked the old man in  the eye, for pride stirred strangely
within  him, still stung  by  the scorn  and suspicion in that  cold  voice.
'Little service, no  doubt, will so great a lord of Men  think to  find in a
hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I  will offer
it,  in payment  of my  debt.'  Twitching  aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew
forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet.
A pale smile, like a gleam of  cold sun  on a winter's evening,  passed
over the old man's face; but he  bent his head and held out his hand, laying
the shards of the horn aside. 'Give me the weapon!' he said.
Pippin lifted it  and presented the hilt  to him.  'Whence  came this?'
said Denethor.  'Many, many years lie on it.  Surely this is a blade wrought
by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?'
'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country ' said
Pippin. 'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell
more of them.'
'I see that strange tales  are woven about you,'  said  Denethor,  'and
once again it  is shown  that looks may belie the man -  or the  halfling. I
accept  your  service.  For you  are not  daunted  by  words;  and you  have
courteous  speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South.
And we shall have  need of all folk of courtesy, be they great  or small, in
the days to come. Swear to me now!'
'Take the hilt,' said Gandalf,  'and speak after the Lord, if  you  are
resolved on this.'
'I am,' said Pippin.
The  old man laid  the  sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to
the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor:
'Here do I swear  fealty and  service  to  Gondor, and  to the Lord and
Steward of the realm, to  speak and to be silent,  to do and  to let be,  to
come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living or dying, from
this hour  henceforth, until my  lord  release me, or death take me, or  the
world end. So say I, Peregrin son of Paladin of the Shire of the Halflings.'
And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord  of Gondor, Steward
of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is
given: fealty with love, valour with honour, oath- breaking with vengeance.'
Then Pippin received back his sword and put it in its sheath.
'And now,' said  Denethor, 'my first command  to you: speak and be  not
silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that  you can of
Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!' As he  spoke  he  struck a small silver
gong  that  stood  near his footstool,  and at  once  servants came forward.
Pippin saw then that they had been standing in alcoves on either side of the
door, unseen as he and Gandalf entered.
'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see
that none trouble us for one hour.'
'It is all that  I have to spare,  for there is  much else to heed,' he
said  to Gandalf.  'Much of more import,  it  may seem,  and yet to  me less
pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.'
'And earlier, it is to  be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden
hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind,
only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous.  Is it naught to you
that Thjoden has fought a great battle and  that Isengard is overthrown, and
that I have broken the staff of Saruman?'
'It is much to me. But I know already  sufficient of these deeds for my
own  counsel  against  the menace of the East.' He turned his  dark  eyes on
Gandalf, and now  Pippin  saw a likeness between  the  two, and he  felt the
strain between them,  almost as if  he saw a line of smouldering fire, drawn
from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame.
Denethor  looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did,
more kingly,  beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet  by a sense other than
sight  Pippin perceived that  Gandalf had  the greater power and the  deeper
wisdom, and a majesty that  was veiled.  And he was  older, far older.  'How
much older?' he wondered, and  then  he thought  how odd it was that he  had
never thought about it before. Treebeard had  said  something about wizards,
but even  then  he  had  not  thought of Gandalf as  one  of them. What  was
Gandalf? In what  far  time and place did he come  into  the world, and when
would he leave it? And  then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor
and Gandalf  still looked each other in the eye, as if  reading the  other's
mind. But it was Denethor who first withdrew his gaze.
'Yea,' he  said; 'for though  the Stones  be lost, they say,  still the
lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come
to
them. But sit now!'
Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver
with  a  silver flagon  and cups,  and  white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he
could  not  take his eyes  from  the  old lord.  Was it so, or  had  he only
imagined it, that  as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam  of his  eye had
glanced upon Pippin's face?
'Now tell  me your tale,  my  liege,' said Denethor, half  kindly; half
mockingly. 'For the words  of one whom my son so befriended will be
welcome
indeed.'
Pippin never forgot that hour in the great  hall under the piercing eye
of the Lord of  Gondor,  stabbed ever and anon by his  shrewd questions, and
