pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.'
'And earlier, it is to  be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden
hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind,
only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous.  Is it naught to you
that Thjoden has fought a great battle and  that Isengard is overthrown, and
that I have broken the staff of Saruman?'
'It is much to me. But I know already  sufficient of these deeds for my
own  counsel  against  the menace of the East.' He turned his  dark  eyes on
Gandalf, and now  Pippin  saw a likeness between  the  two, and he  felt the
strain between them,  almost as if  he saw a line of smouldering fire, drawn
from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame.
Denethor  looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did,
more kingly,  beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet  by a sense other than
sight  Pippin perceived that  Gandalf had  the greater power and the  deeper
wisdom, and a majesty that  was veiled.  And he was  older, far older.  'How
much older?' he wondered, and  then  he thought  how odd it was that he  had
never thought about it before. Treebeard had  said  something about wizards,
but even  then  he  had  not  thought of Gandalf as  one  of them. What  was
Gandalf? In what  far  time and place did he come  into  the world, and when
would he leave it? And  then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor
and Gandalf  still looked each other in the eye, as if  reading the  other's
mind. But it was Denethor who first withdrew his gaze.
'Yea,' he  said; 'for though  the Stones  be lost, they say,  still the
lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come
to
them. But sit now!'
Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver
with  a  silver flagon  and cups,  and  white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he
could  not  take his eyes  from  the  old lord.  Was it so, or  had  he only
imagined it, that  as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam  of his  eye had
glanced upon Pippin's face?
'Now tell  me your tale,  my  liege,' said Denethor, half  kindly; half
mockingly. 'For the words  of one whom my son so befriended will be
welcome
indeed.'
Pippin never forgot that hour in the great  hall under the piercing eye
of the Lord of  Gondor,  stabbed ever and anon by his  shrewd questions, and
all the while conscious of  Gandalf at his side, watching and listening, and
(so Pippin felt) holding  in check a rising  wrath and impatience.  When the
hour was  over and Denethor again rang  the gong, Pippin felt worn out.  'It
cannot  be  more  than  nine o'clock,'  he thought.  'I  could now eat three
breakfasts on end.'
'Lead  the  Lord  Mithrandir  to  the housing prepared for  him,'  said
Denethor, 'and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he will.
But  be it known that  I have  now sworn him to  my service, and he shall be
known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass-words. Send word
to the Captains that they shall wait on me here, as soon as may be after the
third hour has rung.
'And  you,  my Lord  Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when  you will.
None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours
of sleep. Let your wrath at an old man's folly run off and then return to my
comfort!'
'Folly?'  said  Gandalf. 'Nay,  my lord, when you are a dotard you will
die. You can  use  even your grief as  a cloak.  Do you  think that I do not
understand your purpose in  questioning for an hour one who knows the least,
while I sit by?'
'If you understand  it,  then  be  content,' returned  Denethor. 'Pride
would  be  folly that disdained help and counsel  at need; but you deal  out
such gifts according to your own designs. Yet  the Lord of Gondor  is not to
be made the tool  of other men's purposes, however worthy. And to  him there
is no purpose higher  in the world as it now stands than the good of Gondor;
and the rule of Gondor, my lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king
should come again.'
'Unless  the  king  should  come  again?' said Gandalf. 'Well,  my lord
Steward,  it is  your task  to keep some  kingdom still against  that event,
which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all  the aid that you
are pleased to ask for.  But  I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine,
neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small.  But all worthy things that
are in peril as the world now stands,  those are my care. And for my part, I
shall  not wholly  fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything
passes through this night that  can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower
again in days to come. For I also am a steward.  Did you not know?' And with
that he turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at his side.
Gandalf  did not  look  at Pippin or  speak a word to him as they went.
Their  guide brought them from  the doors  of  the hall, and  then  led them
across  the  Court  of the  Fountain into a lane  between  tall buildings of
stone. After  several turns  they came to a house close to the wall  of  the
citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the  hill
with  the mountain. Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide
carven  stair,  he showed  them to a fair room, light  and airy, with goodly
hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured. It  was sparely furnished, having but
a  small table,  two chairs and a  bench;  but  at  either side  there  were
curtained alcoves  and  well-clad beds  within with  vessels  and basins for
washing. There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over
the
great  curve of  Anduin, still shrouded in  mists, towards the Emyn Muil and
Rauros  far away. Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep
stone sill.
'Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he  said, as their guide went out and
closed the door. 'I did the best I could.'
'You did  indeed!' said Gandalf,  laughing suddenly; and  he  came  and
stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing
out  of the window.  Pippin glanced in  some  wonder  at the face now  close
beside his own, for the  sound of that laugh had been gay and merry.  Yet in
the wizard's  face he saw  at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as
he looked more intently he perceived that under all there was a great joy: a
fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth.
'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be
long  before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such
terrible old  men.  Still the Lord of Gondor  learned more from you than you
may have  guessed, Pippin. You  could not hide the fact that Boromir did not
lead the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high
honour
who was coming  to Minas Tirith;  and that  he had a famous sword. Men think
much about the stories of  old  days in Gondor;  and Denethor has given long
thought  to the rhyme and to  the words             Isildur's  Bane    , since Boromir went
away.
'He  is not as other  men  of  this  time,  Pippin, and whatever be his
descent  from  father  to son, by some chance the blood  of Westernesse runs
nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet did not in
Boromir whom he  loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends
