Their  guide brought them from  the doors  of  the hall, and  then  led them
across  the  Court  of the  Fountain into a lane  between  tall buildings of
stone. After  several turns  they came to a house close to the wall  of  the
citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the  hill
with  the mountain. Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide
carven  stair,  he showed  them to a fair room, light  and airy, with goodly
hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured. It  was sparely furnished, having but
a  small table,  two chairs and a  bench;  but  at  either side  there  were
curtained alcoves  and  well-clad beds  within with  vessels  and basins for
washing. There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over
the
great  curve of  Anduin, still shrouded in  mists, towards the Emyn Muil and
Rauros  far away. Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep
stone sill.
'Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he  said, as their guide went out and
closed the door. 'I did the best I could.'
'You did  indeed!' said Gandalf,  laughing suddenly; and  he  came  and
stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing
out  of the window.  Pippin glanced in  some  wonder  at the face now  close
beside his own, for the  sound of that laugh had been gay and merry.  Yet in
the wizard's  face he saw  at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as
he looked more intently he perceived that under all there was a great joy: a
fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth.
'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be
long  before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such
terrible old  men.  Still the Lord of Gondor  learned more from you than you
may have  guessed, Pippin. You  could not hide the fact that Boromir did not
lead the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high
honour
who was coming  to Minas Tirith;  and that  he had a famous sword. Men think
much about the stories of  old  days in Gondor;  and Denethor has given long
thought  to the rhyme and to  the words             Isildur's  Bane    , since Boromir went
away.
'He  is not as other  men  of  this  time,  Pippin, and whatever be his
descent  from  father  to son, by some chance the blood  of Westernesse runs
nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet did not in
Boromir whom he  loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends
his will thither, much of what is passing in the minds of men, even of those
that dwell far off. It is difficult to deceive him, and dangerous to try.
'Remember that! For you  are  now  sworn to his  service. I do not know
what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was well done.
I  did not hinder  it,  for  generous deed should  not  be  checked  by cold
counsel.  It  touched  his  heart,  as  well (may I  say it) as pleasing his
humour. And at least you are free  now  to move  about as  you will in Minas
Tirith - when you are not on  duty. For there is another side to it. You are
at his command; and he will not forget. Be wary still!'
He fell silent and sighed. 'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may
bring. For  one thing, tomorrow will  be certain to bring  worse than today,
for many days  to  come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it.
The board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire
to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor.  I do not think  that he is in
the City; but I have had no  time to gather news. I must go.  Pippin. I must
go to this lords' council and learn what I  can. But the Enemy has the move,
and he is about to open his full game.  And pawns are likely to see  as much
of it  as  any,  Peregrin son of Paladin,  soldier  of  Gondor. Sharpen your
blade!'
Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. 'I  am in haste Pippin,'
he said. 'Do  me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you  are
not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how  he is housed. These
people
are kindly to beasts, for they are a good  and wise folk, but they have less
skill with horses than some.'
With that Gandalf went out;  and as he did so, there came the note of a
clear sweet bell ringing in  a tower of  the citadel. Three strokes it rang,
like silver in  the  air, and ceased: the third hour from the rising of  the
sun.
After a minute Pippin went to  the door and  down the stair  and looked
about the street. The sun was now  shining warm and bright,  and the  towers
and tall houses cast long  clear-cut shadows westward.  High in the blue air
Mount Mindolluin lifted its  white helm and snowy cloak.  Armed men  went to
and fro in the ways of  the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to
changes of post and duty.
'Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire,' said Pippin aloud to himself.
'Just  the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring  sunshine.
And  how I  should like  breakfast! Do these  people ever  have it, or is it
over? And when do they have dinner, and where?'
Presently he noticed a man, clad  in  black and white, coming along the
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely
and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but he had no need. The man
came straight up to him.
'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been
sworn to the  service of the  Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his
hand and Pippin took it.
'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I
have been sent  to you to teach you the pass-words, and to  tell you some of
the many things that  no doubt you  will  wish to know. And  for my part,  I
would learn of you also.  For  never before have  we seen a halfling in this
land and though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in  any
tale that we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir.  Do you know him
well?'
of
'Well,' said Pippin.  'I  have known    him all my short  life, as you
might say; and lately  I have travelled far with him. But there  is  much to
read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more  than a page or two.
Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of
our Company, I think, who really knew him.'
'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?'
'Oh,' stammered  Pippin, 'he was a man who went  about with us. I think
he is in Rohan now.'
'You have  been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of
that land also;  for we put much of what little hope we have  in its people.
But I am forgetting my errand, which was first to answer what you would ask.
What would you know, Master Peregrin?'
'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to  say so, rather  a burning
question  in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that?
I mean, what  are  the  meal-times, if you  understand me, and where is  the
dining-room, if there is one?  And the inns? I looked, but never a one could
I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught  of
ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.'
Beregond looked at him  gravely. 'An old campaigner,  I see,'  he said.
'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next  hope of food
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not  yet
