And  how I  should like  breakfast! Do these  people ever  have it, or is it
over? And when do they have dinner, and where?'
Presently he noticed a man, clad  in  black and white, coming along the
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely
and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but he had no need. The man
came straight up to him.
'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been
sworn to the  service of the  Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his
hand and Pippin took it.
'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I
have been sent  to you to teach you the pass-words, and to  tell you some of
the many things that  no doubt you  will  wish to know. And  for my part,  I
would learn of you also.  For  never before have  we seen a halfling in this
land and though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in  any
tale that we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir.  Do you know him
well?'
of
'Well,' said Pippin.  'I  have known    him all my short  life, as you
might say; and lately  I have travelled far with him. But there  is  much to
read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more  than a page or two.
Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of
our Company, I think, who really knew him.'
'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?'
'Oh,' stammered  Pippin, 'he was a man who went  about with us. I think
he is in Rohan now.'
'You have  been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of
that land also;  for we put much of what little hope we have  in its people.
But I am forgetting my errand, which was first to answer what you would ask.
What would you know, Master Peregrin?'
'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to  say so, rather  a burning
question  in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that?
I mean, what  are  the  meal-times, if you  understand me, and where is  the
dining-room, if there is one?  And the inns? I looked, but never a one could
I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught  of
ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.'
Beregond looked at him  gravely. 'An old campaigner,  I see,'  he said.
'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next  hope of food
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not  yet
eaten today?'
'Well, yes,  to speak in courtesy, yes,' said Pippin. 'But no more than
a cup of wine  and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but  he
racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.'
Beregond laughed. 'At the table small men may  do the greater deeds, we
say. But you  have broken  your fast  as well as any man in the Citadel, and
with  greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower  of guard and is now in
posture  of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take  a morsel in the grey  light,
and go  to our duties  at  the opening hour. But do not despair!' He laughed
again,  seeing the  dismay in Pippin's  face. 'Those who have had heavy duty
take somewhat  to refresh  their strength  in the mid-morning. Then there is
the  nuncheon,  at noon or  after as  duties allow; and men  gather for  the
daymeal, and such mirth as there still may be, about the hour of sunset.
'Come! We will walk a little and then go find us  some refreshment, and
eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.'
'One moment!' said Pippin blushing. 'Greed, or hunger by your courtesy,
put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call  him, asked me to
see to his horse - Shadowfax,  a  great steed of Rohan, and the apple of the
king's  eye, I  am told, though he  has  given  him  to  Mithrandir  for his
services. I think his new master loves the beast  better than  he loves many
men, and if his  good  will is  of  any value to this  city,  you will treat
Shadowfax with all honour: with greater  kindness than you have treated this
hobbit, if it is possible.'
'Hobbit?' said Beregond.
'That is what we call ourselves,' said Pippin.
'I am glad to learn it,' said Beregond, 'for now I may say that strange
accents  do not  mar fair speech,  and hobbits are  a  fair-spoken folk. But
come! You shall make me acquainted with this good  horse. I love beasts, and
we  see  them  seldom  in this  stony city;  for my  people  came  from  the
mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall
be short, a mere call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.'
Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the
sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables
where  a   few  swift  horses  were  kept,  hard  by  the  lodgings  of  the
errand-riders of  the  Lord: messengers always ready  to  go at  the  urgent
command of Denethor or his  chief  captains. But  now all the horses and the
riders were out and away.
Shadowfax  whinnied as Pippin  entered the stable and  turned his head.
'Good morning!'  said Pippin.  'Gandalf will come  as soon as  he may. He is
busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and
you resting, I hope, after your long labours.'
Shadowfax  tossed  his  head  and  stamped. But he allowed  Beregond to
handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks.
'He looks  as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a
great journey,' said Beregond. 'How  strong and proud  he is!  Where  is his
harness? It should be rich and fair.'
'None is  rich  and fair  enough for him,' said Pippin.  'He will  have
none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no
bit, bridle,  whip,  or  thong  will  tame  him.  Farewell, Shadowfax!  Have
patience. Battle is coming.'
Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and
they covered their ears.  Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger
was well filled.
'And now for our  manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the
citadel, and so  to a door in the north side of the great tower. There  they
went  down a  long  cool stair into a  wide alley lit with lamps. There were
hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open.
'This  is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the  Guard.' said
Beregond.  'Greetings,  Targon!' he called through the hatch.  'It  is early
yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has
ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning,
and he is hungry. Give us what you have!'
They got there bread, and butter, and cheese  and  apples:  the last of
the  winter store,  wrinkled but  sound and sweet;  and a leather flagon  of
new-drawn ale, and  wooden platters  and cups. They put  all into  a  wicker
basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place
at  the  east  end of  the  great out-thrust battlement where  there was  an
embrasure in  the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there  they
could look out on the morning over the world.
They  ate  and drank; and they  talked now of  Gondor and its  ways and
customs, now  of the Shire and the strange countries that  Pippin  had seen.
And ever as they talked Beregond  was more amazed,  and looked with  greater
wonder  at the  hobbit, swinging his short  legs as he sat  on the seat,  or
standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below.
