Shadowfax  whinnied as Pippin  entered the stable and  turned his head.
'Good morning!'  said Pippin.  'Gandalf will come  as soon as  he may. He is
busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and
you resting, I hope, after your long labours.'
Shadowfax  tossed  his  head  and  stamped. But he allowed  Beregond to
handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks.
'He looks  as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a
great journey,' said Beregond. 'How  strong and proud  he is!  Where  is his
harness? It should be rich and fair.'
'None is  rich  and fair  enough for him,' said Pippin.  'He will  have
none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no
bit, bridle,  whip,  or  thong  will  tame  him.  Farewell, Shadowfax!  Have
patience. Battle is coming.'
Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and
they covered their ears.  Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger
was well filled.
'And now for our  manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the
citadel, and so  to a door in the north side of the great tower. There  they
went  down a  long  cool stair into a  wide alley lit with lamps. There were
hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open.
'This  is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the  Guard.' said
Beregond.  'Greetings,  Targon!' he called through the hatch.  'It  is early
yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has
ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning,
and he is hungry. Give us what you have!'
They got there bread, and butter, and cheese  and  apples:  the last of
the  winter store,  wrinkled but  sound and sweet;  and a leather flagon  of
new-drawn ale, and  wooden platters  and cups. They put  all into  a  wicker
basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place
at  the  east  end of  the  great out-thrust battlement where  there was  an
embrasure in  the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there  they
could look out on the morning over the world.
They  ate  and drank; and they  talked now of  Gondor and its  ways and
customs, now  of the Shire and the strange countries that  Pippin  had seen.
And ever as they talked Beregond  was more amazed,  and looked with  greater
wonder  at the  hobbit, swinging his short  legs as he sat  on the seat,  or
standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below.
'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us
you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet
you have endured  perils  and seen marvels that few of our  greybeards could
boast of. I thought  it was the whim of  our Lord to take him  a noble page,
after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so,
and you must pardon my foolishness.'
'I do,' said Pippin. 'Though you are  not far  wrong. I am still little
more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years
yet  before I "come of age", as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about
me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.'
The  sun was now  climbing, and the  mists in the  vale below  had been
drawn up. The last of them  were  floating away, just  overhead, as wisps of
white cloud borne  on  the  stiffening breeze from  the East,  that  was now
flapping and tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel. Away down
in the valley-bottom, five leagues or  so as  the eye leaps, the Great River
could now  be seen grey  and glittering, coming  out of the  north-west, and
bending in a mighty sweep south and west again, till it was lost to  view in
a haze and shimmer, far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away.
Pippin could see all the  Pelennor laid out before him, dotted into the
distance with farmsteads  and little  walls, barns  and  byres, but  nowhere
could he see any kine  or other  beasts.  Many  roads and tracks crossed the
green fields,  and there  was much coming and going: wains moving  in  lines
towards the Great Gate, and  others passing  out.  Now and again  a horseman
would ride up, and leap from  the saddle  and hasten into the City. But most
of the traffic went out along the chief highway,  and that turned south, and
then  bending  swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from
sight.  It was wide  and well-paved, and along its eastern  edge ran a broad
green riding-track, and beyond that a wall. On the ride horsemen galloped to
and  fro, but all the  street seemed to be  choked with great  covered wains
going  south.  But  soon Pippin  saw that  all was in fact well-ordered: the
wains were  moving in  three  lines,  one swifter  drawn  by horses; another
slower, great waggons with fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and
along the west rim of the road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men.
'That is the  road  to the  vales of  Tumladen and  Lossarnach, and the
mountain-villages, and then on  to Lebennin,' said  Beregond. 'There  go the
last  of  the  wains that bear away to refuge the aged the children, and the
women that must go  with them.  They must all  be gone from the Gate and the
road  clear for a league  before  noon: that was the  order.  It  is  a  sad
necessity.'  He sighed. 'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet  again.
And there  were  always too few children  in  this  city; but now there  are
none-save some young lads  that will not depart,  and may  find some task to
do: my own son is one of them.'
They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at
any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields. 'What can
I see there?' he asked, pointing down to the  middle of the great  curve  of
the Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?'
'It was  a city,'  said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor,  of  which
this  was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath  on either side
of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in
the  days of  the youth  of Denethor: not to dwell in,  but  to  hold as  an
outpost, and  to rebuild  the  bridge for the  passage of our arms. And then
came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.'
'The Black Riders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes,  and they  were wide
and dark with an old fear re-awakened.
'Yes,  they  were  black,' said  Beregond,  'and  I  see  that you know
something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.'
'I know of them,' said  Pippin softly,  'but I will not  speak of  them
now, so near, so near.' He  broke  off  and lifted his eyes above the River,
and  it  seemed to  him that  all  he could  see was  a vast and threatening
shadow. Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged
edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a
cloud-wall, and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But  even as he looked
it seemed to his eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly,
slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun.
'So  near to Mordor?' said  Beregond quietly.  'Yes,  there it lies. We
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it
seems fainter and more distant;  sometimes nearer and darker. It  is growing
and  darkening now; and  therefore  our fear  and disquiet grow too. And the
Fell Riders, less  than a year ago they won back the crossings, and  many of
our best men were  slain.  Boromir it  was that drove the enemy at last back
from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a
little  while. But  we  await  now  a new onslaught there.  Maybe the  chief
onslaught of the war that comes.'
'When?' said Pippin. 'Have  you a  guess?  For I saw the  beacons  last
