road  clear for a league  before  noon: that was the  order.  It  is  a  sad
necessity.'  He sighed. 'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet  again.
And there  were  always too few children  in  this  city; but now there  are
none-save some young lads  that will not depart,  and may  find some task to
do: my own son is one of them.'
They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at
any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields. 'What can
I see there?' he asked, pointing down to the  middle of the great  curve  of
the Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?'
'It was  a city,'  said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor,  of  which
this  was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath  on either side
of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in
the  days of  the youth  of Denethor: not to dwell in,  but  to  hold as  an
outpost, and  to rebuild  the  bridge for the  passage of our arms. And then
came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.'
'The Black Riders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes,  and they  were wide
and dark with an old fear re-awakened.
'Yes,  they  were  black,' said  Beregond,  'and  I  see  that you know
something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.'
'I know of them,' said  Pippin softly,  'but I will not  speak of  them
now, so near, so near.' He  broke  off  and lifted his eyes above the River,
and  it  seemed to  him that  all  he could  see was  a vast and threatening
shadow. Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged
edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a
cloud-wall, and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But  even as he looked
it seemed to his eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly,
slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun.
'So  near to Mordor?' said  Beregond quietly.  'Yes,  there it lies. We
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it
seems fainter and more distant;  sometimes nearer and darker. It  is growing
and  darkening now; and  therefore  our fear  and disquiet grow too. And the
Fell Riders, less  than a year ago they won back the crossings, and  many of
our best men were  slain.  Boromir it  was that drove the enemy at last back
from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a
little  while. But  we  await  now  a new onslaught there.  Maybe the  chief
onslaught of the war that comes.'
'When?' said Pippin. 'Have  you a  guess?  For I saw the  beacons  last
night and  the errand-riders; and  Gandalf said that it was a sign that  war
had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to  have
slowed up again.'
'Only because  everything is now ready,' said Beregond. 'It  is but the
deep breath before the plunge.'
'But why were the beacons lit last night?'
'It is  over-late  to  send  for aid  when you  are  already besieged,'
answered Beregond. 'But I  do  not  know the  counsel of  the  Lord  and his
captains. They have many ways of gathering news.  And  the Lord Denethor  is
unlike  other men: he sees far. Some  say that as he sits alone in his  high
chamber  in the Tower at night, and bends his thought  this way and that, he
can read somewhat of the future; and that he  will  at times search even the
mind of the  Enemy, wrestling  with  him. And so it  is that he is old, worn
before his  time. But however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond
the River on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings.
'But if you would know what I think set  the beacons ablaze, it was the
news  that came yestereve  out of Lebennin. There is a great  fleet  drawing
near to the mouths of Anduin, manned by  the corsairs of Umbar in the South.
They have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor, and they have allied them
with the Enemy, and now  make  a heavy stroke in  his cause. For this attack
will draw off much of the help  that  we looked  to  have  from Lebennin and
Belfalas, where folk are hardy and numerous. All the more do our thoughts go
north to Rohan; and the more glad are we for these tidings  of  victory that
you bring.
'And yet' - he paused and stood up, and looked round, north,  east, and
south - 'the doings at Isengard  should warn us that we are  caught now in a
great net and strategy. This is no longer a  bickering at the fords, raiding
from Ithilien and from Anurien, ambushing and pillaging. This is a great war
long-planned, and we are but one piece in it, whatever pride may say. Things
move  in the  far  East beyond the  Inland Sea, it is reported; and north in
Mirkwood and beyond; and south in Harad. And now all  realms shall be put to
the test, to stand, or fall - under the Shadow.
'Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour:  ever we bear  the brunt of
the  chief  hatred  of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down out of  the
depths of  time and over the deeps  of the Sea. Here will the  hammer-stroke
fall hardest. And for that reason Mithrandir came  hither in such haste. For
if we fall, who shall stand? And, Master  Peregrin, do you see any hope that
we shall stand?'
Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and
brave banners, and  the sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom
in the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of  the orcs
in  the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard,  the birds of evil
eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire - and of the winged
terror,  the Nazgyl. He  shuddered, and hope seemed  to wither. And even  at
that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark
wing had  passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high
and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold.
He blanched and cowered against the wall.
'What was that?' asked Beregond. 'You also felt something?'
'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the  sign of our fall, and the shadow of
doom, a Fell Rider of the air.'
'Yes, the  shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear  that  Minas  Tirith
shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.'
For a time they  sat together with bowed heads and did  not speak. Then
suddenly Pippin looked up and  saw  that  the  sun was still shining and the
banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook  himself. 'It is passed,' he
said. 'No, my  heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and
is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still upon
our knees.'
'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and  fro.  'Nay,
though all things  must come  utterly to an  end  in  time, Gondor shall not
perish yet. Not though  the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build
a hill of carrion before them. There  are still other fastnesses, and secret
ways of escape  into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some
hidden valley where the grass is green.'
'All the same, I  wish it was over for good or ill.' said Pippin. 'I am
no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on the edge
of one  that  I  can't escape  is  worst  of all.  What a long  day it seems
already! I should  be happier, if we  were not obliged  to stand and  watch,
making  no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in
Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.'
'Ah, there  you  lay  your finger on  the  sore  that  many feel!' said
Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can
