front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents  and pavilions. A special
entrance  was cut into the bank leading to  the road, and wide steps  and  a
large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,
adjoining the field, were intensely  interested  and  generally envied.  Old
Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden.
The tents began to  go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big
that the tree that grew in the  field was right inside it, and stood proudly
near one end, at the head of  the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its
branches. More  promising still (to the hobbits' mind): an enormous open-air
kitchen was erected in the  north corner of  the field. A draught  of cooks,
from every inn and eating-house  for miles around, arrived to supplement the
dwarves and other odd  folk  that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose
to its height.
Then the weather  clouded  over.  That was on Wednesday the  eve of the
Party.  Anxiety was  intense. Then Thursday,  September  the 22nd,  actually
dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun
began.
Bilbo  Baggins called it  a       party,   but it  was really  a  variety  of
entertainments  rolled  into one.  Practically  everybody  living  near  was
invited. A very few were overlooked  by accident, but  as they turned up all
the same, that did not matter.  Many people  from other parts of  the  Shire
were also asked; and there were even  a few from outside the  borders. Bilbo
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. He gave away
presents to all and sundry - the latter were  those  who went out again by a
back way  and came  in  again by  the gate. Hobbits give  presents  to other
people  on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a  rule, and not
so lavishly  as on this  occasion; but it was  not a bad system. Actually in
Hobbiton  and Bywater every  day in the year it was somebody's  birthday, so
that every  hobbit  in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present
at least once a week. But they never got tired of them.
On this occasion the presents were unusually  good. The hobbit-children
were so excited that for a while they almost forgot about eating. There were
toys the like  of which they had  never seen before, all beautiful and  some
obviously magical.  Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before,  and
had  come  all  the way  from  the Mountain and from Dale, and  were of real
dwarf-make.
When  every guest had been  welcomed  and was finally inside the  gate,
there were  songs, dances, music, games,  and,  of course,  food  and drink.
There were  three  official  meals: lunch,  tea, and dinner (or supper). But
lunch and  tea were marked chiefly by  the fact that at  those times all the
guests  were sitting  down and eating together. At  other  times  there were
merely lots  of  people  eating and drinking  -  continuously from elevenses
until six-thirty, when the fireworks started.
The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought  by  him, but
designed and made by  him; and the  special effects, set pieces, and flights
of rockets were let off by him. But  there was  also a generous distribution
of  squibs,  crackers,  backarappers,   sparklers,  torches,  dwarf-candles,
elf-fountains, goblin-barkers  and thunder-claps. They  were all superb. The
art of Gandalf improved with age.
There were  rockets like  a flight  of scintillating birds singing with
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves
opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches
dropped glowing flowers down upon the  astonished hobbits, disappearing with
a  sweet  scent just  before they touched  their  upturned faces. There were
fountains  of butterflies that flew  glittering into  the trees;  there were
pillars  of  coloured  fires that rose  and  turned into eagles, or  sailing
ships,  or  a  phalanx of flying swans; there was a red  thunderstorm  and a
shower  of  yellow  rain; there was a  forest  of silver spears  that sprang
suddenly  into the  air with a  yell like an embattled  army, and came  down
again into the Water with a hiss like a  hundred hot snakes.  And there  was
also one last surprise,  in  honour of Bilbo,  and  it startled  the hobbits
exceedingly, as  Gandalf intended. The lights went out. A great  smoke  went
up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow
at  the summit. It spouted green  and scarlet flames. Out flew a  red-golden
dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his
eyes glared down; there  was  a  roar, and he whizzed three  times  over the
heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and  many fell flat on their faces. The
dragon passed like an  express train,  turned a  somersault, and  burst over
Bywater with a deafening explosion.
'That is  the  signal for  supper!'  said  Bilbo.  The  pain  and alarm
vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There  was
a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that  is, except those invited
to the special family dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with
the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called
by the hobbits one Gross, though  the  word was not considered proper to use
of people); and  the  guests were selected  from  all  the families to which
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with  the addition of a  few special unrelated
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits  were included, and present by
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in  the
matter  of  sitting up late,  especially when there  was a chance of getting
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.
There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and also  many  Tooks  and
Brandybucks;  there  were  various  Grubbs   (relations  of  Bilbo  Baggins'
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and a
selection  of  Burrowses,  Bolgers, Bracegirdles,  Brockhouses,  Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly
connected
with Bilbo, and  some of them  had hardly ever  been in Hobbiton before,  as
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses  were not
forgotten.  Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo  and
detested Frodo,  but  so magnificent  was the invitation  card,  written  in
golden ink, that  they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides,  their
cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing  in  food for many years and  his table
had a high reputation.
All  the  one hundred  and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast;
though they  rather  dreaded  the  after-dinner  speech  of their  host  (an
inevitable item). He was liable to drag  in bits of  what he  called poetry;
and sometimes, after  a glass or two, would  allude to the absurd adventures
of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a                      very
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied,
and prolonged. The  purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had  depleted the
stocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not
matter much.
After  the feast (more or less) came the  Speech. Most of  the  company
were, however, now in a tolerant  mood, at that  delightful stage which they
called 'filling up  the corners'.  They were sipping their favourite drinks,
and nibbling at  their favourite  dainties, and their fears  were forgotten.
They were prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop.
My dear People,     began Bilbo, rising in  his  place. 'Hear! Hear! Hear!'
they shouted,  and  kept on repeating  it  in chorus,  seeming  reluctant to
