house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall
all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the  wall into the
lane.
Suddenly  as they drew nearer  a terrific baying and barking broke out,
and a loud voice was heard shouting: 'Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!'
Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked  on a few paces. The gate
opened and  three  huge dogs came  pelting  out  into  the  lane, and dashed
towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but
Sam shrank  against the wall, while  two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the
three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling.
Through the gate there now appeared  a broad  thick-set  hobbit  with a
round  red  face. 'Hallo! Hallo!  And who may you  be, and what  may you  be
wanting?' he asked.
'Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!' said Pippin.
The farmer looked at  him closely. 'Well, if it  isn't Master Pippin  -
Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin.
'It's a long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know
you. I was just going out to  set my dogs  on  any strangers. There are some
funny things going  on today. Of course, we do get queer folk  wandering  in
these parts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his  head.  'But
this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes  on. He won't cross
my land without leave a second time, not if I can stop it.'
'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin.
'Then you haven't  seen him?' said  the  farmer. 'He  went up the  lane
towards the  causeway not  a  long while back. He  was a funny  customer and
asking funny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass
the news more comfortable. I've a  drop  of good ale on tap, if you and your
friends are willing, Mr. Took.'
It seemed plain that the  farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do
it in his own time and  fashion, so they all accepted  the invitation. 'What
about the dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously.
The farmer laughed.  'They  won't harm you - not unless I  tell 'em to.
Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!'  To the relief of Frodo and
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.
Pippin introduced  the other two to the farmer. 'Mr. Frodo Baggins,' he
said. 'You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.' At the
name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment
Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and
that
the dogs would be  told  to see him  off. But Farmer Maggot took him by  the
arm.
'Well, if that isn't queerer than ever?'  he exclaimed. 'Mr. Baggins is
it? Come inside! We must have a talk.'
They went  into the farmer's  kitchen, and sat by  the wide fire-place.
Mrs. Maggot brought out  beer in  a huge jug, and filled four large mugs. It
was a good brew,  and Pippin found himself more than compensated for
missing
the   Golden  Perch.       Sam  sipped his  beer  suspiciously.  He had a  natural
mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not
disposed to be quick  friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however
long ago.
After  a few remarks about  the weather and the agricultural  prospects
(which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down his  mug and
looked
at them all in turn.
'Now, Mr.  Peregrin,' he  said,  'where  might you  be coming from, and
where might you be going  to?  Were you coming to visit' me? For, if so, you
had gone past my gate without my seeing you.'
'Well, no,'  answered Pippin.  'To tell  you the truth, since  you have
guessed  it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come  over your
fields. But that was quite by accident.  We  lost our way in the woods, back
near Woodhall, trying to take a short cut to the Ferry.'
'If you were  in a hurry,  the road would have served you better,' said
the farmer. 'But I wasn't worrying about  that. You have  leave to walk over
my land, if you have a  mind, Mr.  Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins - though I
daresay  you  still like mushrooms.'  He laughed.  'Ah yes, I recognized the
name.  I recollect  the time when young Frodo  Baggins  was one of the worst
young rascals of Buckland. But it  wasn't mushrooms I was thinking of. I had
just heard the name Baggins before  you  turned up.  What do you think  that
funny customer asked me?'
They  waited anxiously for  him to go on. 'Well,' the farmer continued,
approaching his point with slow relish, 'he came riding on a big black horse
in at  the  gate, which  happened  to be open, and right up to my door.  All
black he was  himself, too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want
to be known. "Now what  in the Shire  can  he want?" I thought to myself. We
don't see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anyway I had never heard
of any like this black fellow.
' "Good-day to you!" I says,  going  out to him. "This  lane don't lead
anywhere,  and wherever  you may be going, your quickest way will be back to
the road." I didn't like the looks of  him; and when  Grip came out, he took
one sniff and  let out a  yelp as if he had been slung: he put down his tail
and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still.
' "I come  from yonder," he  said,  slow  and stiff-like, pointing back
west, over    my   fields, if you please.  "Have you seen          Baggins?"     he asked in a
queer voice,  and bent  down towards  me. I could not see any face,  for his
hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down  my back. But  I did
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold.
' "Be off!" I said. "There are no Bagginses  here.  You're in the wrong
part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton - but you can  go
by road this time."
' "Baggins has  left,"  he answered in a whisper. "He is coming. He  is
not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come
back with gold."
' "No you won't," I said.  "You'll  go back  where you  belong,  double
quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs."
'He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not.
Then he spurred  his great  horse right  at me, and I jumped  out of the way
only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the
gate  and up the lane  towards the causeway like a bolt  of thunder. What do
you think of that?'
Frodo sat for a moment looking at  the fire,  but  his only thought was
how on earth would they  reach the Ferry. 'I don't  know what  to think,' he
said at last.
'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never have
gone  mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo.  Folk  are queer  up
there.'  Sam  stirred in  his  chair,  and  looked  at  the  farmer  with an
unfriendly  eye. 'But you were always a  reckless lad. When  I heard you had
left the Brandybucks  and  gone  off  to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this  all comes of those  strange
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion  in foreign
