we shall stand?'
Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and
brave banners, and  the sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom
in the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of  the orcs
in  the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard,  the birds of evil
eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire - and of the winged
terror,  the Nazgyl. He  shuddered, and hope seemed  to wither. And even  at
that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark
wing had  passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high
and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold.
He blanched and cowered against the wall.
'What was that?' asked Beregond. 'You also felt something?'
'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the  sign of our fall, and the shadow of
doom, a Fell Rider of the air.'
'Yes, the  shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear  that  Minas  Tirith
shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.'
For a time they  sat together with bowed heads and did  not speak. Then
suddenly Pippin looked up and  saw  that  the  sun was still shining and the
banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook  himself. 'It is passed,' he
said. 'No, my  heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and
is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still upon
our knees.'
'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and  fro.  'Nay,
though all things  must come  utterly to an  end  in  time, Gondor shall not
perish yet. Not though  the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build
a hill of carrion before them. There  are still other fastnesses, and secret
ways of escape  into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some
hidden valley where the grass is green.'
'All the same, I  wish it was over for good or ill.' said Pippin. 'I am
no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on the edge
of one  that  I  can't escape  is  worst  of all.  What a long  day it seems
already! I should  be happier, if we  were not obliged  to stand and  watch,
making  no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in
Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.'
'Ah, there  you  lay  your finger on  the  sore  that  many feel!' said
Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can
be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a man
of hardihood  and swift  judgement in the field. But such is  Faramir.  Less
reckless and eager than Boromir, but  not less resolute. Yet what indeed can
he do? We cannot assault  the mountains of -  of yonder  realm. Our reach is
shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand
must be heavy!' He smote the hilt of his sword.
Pippin looked at  him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he
had yet seen in that land; and  with  a glitter in  his eye as he thought of
the battle. 'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,' he thought, but
he  said nothing.  'A  pawn did  Gandalf  say?  Perhaps  but  on  the  wrong
chessboard.'
So they  talked  until the  sun  reached  its height, and suddenly  the
noon-bells were rung, and there was a  stir in the citadel; for all save the
watchmen were going to their meal.
'Will you come with me?' said Beregond. 'You may join my  mess for this
day. I do not know to  what  company  you will be  assigned; or the Lord may
hold you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to
meet as many men as you may, while there is yet time.'
'I shall be glad  to come,' said Pippin. 'I am  lonely, to tell you the
truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had  no one to talk
to  or jest with. Perhaps  I could  really join your  company?  Are  you the
captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?'
'Nay, nay,' Beregond laughed, 'I am no captain. Neither office nor rank
nor lordship  have I,  being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of
the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the  Guard of
the Tower of Gondor  is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in
the land.'
'Then it is far beyond me,' said Pippin. 'Take me back to our room, and
if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like - as your guest.'
Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so  Pippin went
with Beregond and was made known  to  the  men of the  Third Company. And
it
seemed that Beregond got as much honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was
very welcome.  There  had  already  been  much talk  in  the  citadel  about
Mithrandir's companion and his  long  closeting with the  Lord;  and  rumour
declared that a Prince  of the Halflings had  come out of the North to offer
allegiance to Gondor and five  thousand  swords. And some said that when the
Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small
maybe, but doughty.
Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this  hopeful  tale,  he could
not be rid of his new  rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by
Boromir and honoured by  the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for
coming
among them, and  hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him
as much food and ale as he could  wish. Indeed his  only  trouble was to  be
'wary' according  to the counsel of Gandalf, and  not to let  his tongue wag
freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends.
At length  Beregond  rose. 'Farewell for  this time!'  he said. 'I have
duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you  are
lonely, as you  say, maybe  you would like a  merry guide about the City. My
son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go
down to  the  lowest  circle and ask for  the Old  Guesthouse  in  the  Rath
Celerdain, the Lampwrights' Street. You will find him  there with other lads
that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the
Great Gate ere the closing.'
He went out, and soon after all the  others followed. The day was still
fine, though  it  was  growing hazy,  and it was  hot for March, even so far
southwards. Pippin felt sleepy,  but  the  lodging seemed cheerless, and  he
decided to go down and  explore the City. He took a few morsels that he  had
saved to Shadowfax,  and  they were  graciously accepted,  though the  horse
seemed to have no lack. Then he walked on down many winding ways.
People  stared  much  as  he  passed. To  his  face  men  were  gravely
courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands
upon the breast; but  behind him he heard many calls,  as those out of doors
cried to others within  to come  and see the Prince  of the  Halflings,  the
companion of Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common
Speech,
but  it  was not long before he  learned at least what was meant by                   Ernil i
Pheriannath      and knew that his title had gone down before him into the City.
He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to
the lowest and widest circle, and there  he was directed to the Lampwrights'
Street, a broad way running towards  the  Great Gate. In it he found the Old
Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with  two wings running
