Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small
maybe, but doughty.
Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this  hopeful  tale,  he could
not be rid of his new  rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by
Boromir and honoured by  the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for
coming
among them, and  hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him
as much food and ale as he could  wish. Indeed his  only  trouble was to  be
'wary' according  to the counsel of Gandalf, and  not to let  his tongue wag
freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends.
At length  Beregond  rose. 'Farewell for  this time!'  he said. 'I have
duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you  are
lonely, as you  say, maybe  you would like a  merry guide about the City. My
son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go
down to  the  lowest  circle and ask for  the Old  Guesthouse  in  the  Rath
Celerdain, the Lampwrights' Street. You will find him  there with other lads
that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the
Great Gate ere the closing.'
He went out, and soon after all the  others followed. The day was still
fine, though  it  was  growing hazy,  and it was  hot for March, even so far
southwards. Pippin felt sleepy,  but  the  lodging seemed cheerless, and  he
decided to go down and  explore the City. He took a few morsels that he  had
saved to Shadowfax,  and  they were  graciously accepted,  though the  horse
seemed to have no lack. Then he walked on down many winding ways.
People  stared  much  as  he  passed. To  his  face  men  were  gravely
courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands
upon the breast; but  behind him he heard many calls,  as those out of doors
cried to others within  to come  and see the Prince  of the  Halflings,  the
companion of Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common
Speech,
but  it  was not long before he  learned at least what was meant by                   Ernil i
Pheriannath      and knew that his title had gone down before him into the City.
He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to
the lowest and widest circle, and there  he was directed to the Lampwrights'
Street, a broad way running towards  the  Great Gate. In it he found the Old
Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with  two wings running
back from the street, and between them a narrow greensward, behind which
was
the many-windowed house, fronted along its whole  width by  a pillared porch
and  a flight of steps down on  to  the grass.  Boys were playing  among the
pillars,  the only children  that Pippin had  seen  in Minas Tirith,  and he
stopped to look at them. Presently one of them caught sight of him, and with
a  shout  he sprang across  the grass and  came into the street, followed by
several others. There he stood in front of Pippin, looking him up and down.
'Greetings!' said  the lad. 'Where do you come from? You are a stranger
in the City.'
'I was,' said Pippin; 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.'
'Oh  come!' said the lad. 'Then we are all men  here.  But how old  are
you, and what is your name? I am ten  years already, and  shall soon be five
feet.  I am  taller  than you. But then my father  is  a  Guard, one of  the
tallest. What is your father?'
'Which question  shall  I  answer first?' said Pippin. 'My father farms
the  lands  round Whitwell  near  Tuckborough in  the  Shire.  I  am  nearly
twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and  not likely
to grow any more, save sideways.'
'Twenty-nine!' said the lad  and whistled. 'Why, you are  quite old! As
old as my  uncle Iorlas. Still,' he added hopefully, 'I  wager I could stand
you on your head or lay you on your back.'
'Maybe you could, if I let you,' said Pippin with a laugh. 'And maybe I
could  do  the  same  to  you: we know some  wrestling tricks in  my  little
country.  Where,  let  me tell  you,  I am considered  uncommonly large  and
strong; and I have never allowed anyone  to stand me  on  my  head. So if it
came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have  to kill you. For
when you  are older, you will learn that folk are not always what they seem;
and though  you may have taken me for a soft stranger-lad and easy prey, let
me  warn you: I am not,  I  am a halfling,  hard, bold,  and wicked!' Pippin
pulled such  a  grim face  that the boy stepped  back a pace, but at once he
returned with clenched fists and the light of battle in his eye.
'No!'  Pippin laughed. 'Don't  believe what strangers say of themselves
either! I am  not a fighter.  But it  would be politer in any  case for  the
challenger to say who he is.'
The boy drew himself  up  proudly.  'I am Bergil son of Beregond of the
Guards,' he said.
'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him
and he sent me to find you.'
'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look
of dismay came over his face. 'Do not  tell me that he has changed his mind,
and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.'
'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says
that if you would  prefer it to standing me  on  my head, you might show  me
round the  City for  a while  and cheer my loneliness. I can  tell  you some
tales of far countries in return.'
Bergil  clapped his hands,  and laughed with relief.  'All is well,' he
cried. 'Come then! We were  soon going to the  Gate  to look  on. We will go
now.'
'What is happening there?'
'The  Captains  of the  Outlands  are  expected up the South  Road  ere
sundown. Come with us and you will see.'
Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had  since he
parted from Merry, and soon they  were laughing and  talking  gaily  as they
went about  the streets, heedless of the many  glances  that men gave  them.
Before long they found themselves in  a throng going towards the Great Gate.
There Pippin went  up  much in  the esteem of Bergil,  for when he spoke his
name and the pass-word the guard saluted  him and let  him pass through; and
what was more, he allowed him to take his companion with him.
'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.'
Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men  along  the  verge of the road
and of the great paved space into  which all the ways to  Minas Tirith  ran.
All eyes were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away
there! They are coming!'
Pippin and Bergil  edged their way  forward to the front of the  crowd,
and waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheering rolled
towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and
all about them people were shouting.
'Forlong! Forlong!' Pippin  heard men calling.  'What do  they say?' he
asked.
'Forlong  has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of
Lossarnach. That is where  my grandsire  lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old
Forlong!'
