'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him
and he sent me to find you.'
'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look
of dismay came over his face. 'Do not  tell me that he has changed his mind,
and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.'
'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says
that if you would  prefer it to standing me  on  my head, you might show  me
round the  City for  a while  and cheer my loneliness. I can  tell  you some
tales of far countries in return.'
Bergil  clapped his hands,  and laughed with relief.  'All is well,' he
cried. 'Come then! We were  soon going to the  Gate  to look  on. We will go
now.'
'What is happening there?'
'The  Captains  of the  Outlands  are  expected up the South  Road  ere
sundown. Come with us and you will see.'
Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had  since he
parted from Merry, and soon they  were laughing and  talking  gaily  as they
went about  the streets, heedless of the many  glances  that men gave  them.
Before long they found themselves in  a throng going towards the Great Gate.
There Pippin went  up  much in  the esteem of Bergil,  for when he spoke his
name and the pass-word the guard saluted  him and let  him pass through; and
what was more, he allowed him to take his companion with him.
'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.'
Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men  along  the  verge of the road
and of the great paved space into  which all the ways to  Minas Tirith  ran.
All eyes were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away
there! They are coming!'
Pippin and Bergil  edged their way  forward to the front of the  crowd,
and waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheering rolled
towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and
all about them people were shouting.
'Forlong! Forlong!' Pippin  heard men calling.  'What do  they say?' he
asked.
'Forlong  has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of
Lossarnach. That is where  my grandsire  lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old
Forlong!'
Leading the line there came walking a big thick-limbed horse, and on it
sat a man of  wide  shoulders and  huge girth, but old and grey-bearded, yet
mail-clad and  black-helmed and  bearing  a  long heavy  spear.  Behind  him
marched  proudly  a  dusty  line  of  men,   well-armed  and  bearing  great
battle-axes; grim-faced they were, and shorter  and  somewhat swarthier than
any men that Pippin had yet seen in Gondor.
'Forlong!' men shouted.  'True heart, true friend!  Forlong!'  But when
the men of Lossarnach  had passed they muttered: 'So few! Two hundreds,
what
are they? We hoped for ten times the number. That will be the new tidings of
the  black fleet.  They  are sparing only a tithe  of  their strength. Still
every little is a gain.'
And  so  the  companies  came and  were hailed and  cheered  and passed
through  the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor
in a dark hour; but always too few, always less than hope looked for or need
asked. The  men of  Ringlu  Vale  behind the  son  of  their  lord, Dervorin
striding  on foot: three hundreds. From  the uplands of  Morthond, the great
Blackroot Vale,  tall Duinhir with  his sons, Duilin and  Derufin,  and five
hundred bowmen. From the  Anfalas, the Langstrand far away,  a  long line of
men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little villages, scantily
equipped  save for the household of Golasgil their lord. From Lamedon, a few
grim hillmen without a  captain.  Fisher-folk of the Ethir, some hundred  or
more spared from the ships. Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath
Gelin with three hundreds  of gallant green-clad men. And last and proudest,
Imrahil,  Prince  of Dol Amroth,  kinsman of the  Lord, with  gilded banners
bearing his token of the Ship and  the Silver Swan, and a company of knights
in full harness riding grey horses; and behind them seven hundreds of men at
arms, tall as lords, grey-eyed, dark-haired, singing as they came.
And  that was  all, less than  three thousands full told. No more would
come. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into  the City and died
away. The onlookers stood silent for a while. Dust hung  in the air, for the
wind had  died and  the  evening  was heavy. Already  the  closing  hour was
drawing nigh, and the red sun had gone behind  Mindolluin. Shadow  came
down
on the City.
Pippin  looked  up,  and  it  seemed to  him that  the  sky  had  grown
ashen-grey, as  if a vast dust  and  smoke hung above  them, and  light came
dully  through it. But in the West  the dying  sun had  set all  the fume on
fire, and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked with
embers. 'So ends a  fair day in wrath!' he said forgetful of the lad  at his
side.
'So it  will, if  I  have not returned before the sundown-bells,'  said
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.'
Hand  in hand they went  back into the City, the last to  pass the Gate
before it  was  shut;  and as they  reached the Lampwrights'  Street all the
bells in the towers tolled solemnly. Lights sprang in many windows, and from
the houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound
of song.
'Farewell  for  this  time,'  said  Bergil.  'Take  my  greetings to my
:father, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg.
Almost  I wish now that there was no war,  for we might have  had some merry
times. We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is
good to be  there in Spring, the  woods and fields are  full of flowers. But
maybe we will go thither together  yet.  They will never overcome our  Lord,
and my father is very valiant. Farewell and return!'
They  parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel.  It seemed  a
long way, and he  grew hot and  very hungry; and night closed down swift and
dark.  Not a star pricked the sky. He  was late for the daymeal in the mess,
and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his
son.  After the  meal Pippin stayed a while,  and then took his leave, for a
strange gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf
again.
'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at  the door of the  small hall,
on the north side of the citadel, where  they had sat. 'It is a black night,
and all the blacker  since  orders came that lights are  to be dimmed within
the City, and none are to shine out from  the walls. And I can give you news
of another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor  early tomorrow.
I  fear you will not  be for the Third  Company. Still we may  hope  to meet
again. Farewell and sleep in peace!'
The lodging was  dark,  save  for a  little lantern  set  on the table.
Gandalf was  not there.  Gloom settled  still  more  heavily  on Pippin.  He
climbed on the bench  and tried  to  peer out of a window,  but it was  like
looking  into a pool of ink. He  got down and closed the shutter and went to
bed.  For a  while he lay and listened for  sounds  of Gandalf's return, and
