dully  through it. But in the West  the dying  sun had  set all  the fume on
fire, and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked with
embers. 'So ends a  fair day in wrath!' he said forgetful of the lad  at his
side.
'So it  will, if  I  have not returned before the sundown-bells,'  said
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.'
Hand  in hand they went  back into the City, the last to  pass the Gate
before it  was  shut;  and as they  reached the Lampwrights'  Street all the
bells in the towers tolled solemnly. Lights sprang in many windows, and from
the houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound
of song.
'Farewell  for  this  time,'  said  Bergil.  'Take  my  greetings to my
:father, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg.
Almost  I wish now that there was no war,  for we might have  had some merry
times. We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is
good to be  there in Spring, the  woods and fields are  full of flowers. But
maybe we will go thither together  yet.  They will never overcome our  Lord,
and my father is very valiant. Farewell and return!'
They  parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel.  It seemed  a
long way, and he  grew hot and  very hungry; and night closed down swift and
dark.  Not a star pricked the sky. He  was late for the daymeal in the mess,
and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his
son.  After the  meal Pippin stayed a while,  and then took his leave, for a
strange gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf
again.
'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at  the door of the  small hall,
on the north side of the citadel, where  they had sat. 'It is a black night,
and all the blacker  since  orders came that lights are  to be dimmed within
the City, and none are to shine out from  the walls. And I can give you news
of another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor  early tomorrow.
I  fear you will not  be for the Third  Company. Still we may  hope  to meet
again. Farewell and sleep in peace!'
The lodging was  dark,  save  for a  little lantern  set  on the table.
Gandalf was  not there.  Gloom settled  still  more  heavily  on Pippin.  He
climbed on the bench  and tried  to  peer out of a window,  but it was  like
looking  into a pool of ink. He  got down and closed the shutter and went to
bed.  For a  while he lay and listened for  sounds  of Gandalf's return, and
then he fell into an uneasy sleep.
In  the  night he was wakened by  a light, and he saw that  Gandalf had
come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove.
There were candles on the  table and rolls of parchment. He heard the wizard
sigh, and mutter: 'When will Faramir return?'
'Hullo!' said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. 'I thought you
had forgotten  all about me. I am  glad  to see you back. It has been a long
day.'
'But the night  will be too  short,' said  Gandalf.  'I have  come back
here, for I  must have a  little peace,  alone. You should sleep,  in  a bed
while you still  may. At the sunrise I  shall take you to the  Lord Denethor
again. No, when the  summons  comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun.
There will be no dawn.'
Chapter 2. The Passing of the Grey Company
Gandalf was gone, and the thudding  hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the
night, when Merry came  back to Aragorn. He  had only a light bundle, for he
had lost his pack at Parth  Galen, and all he had was a few useful things he
had picked up among the wreckage of  Isengard. Hasufel was  already saddled.
Legolas and Gimli with their horse stood close by.
'So four of the Company still remain,'  said Aragorn. 'We  will ride on
together.  But  we  shall  not  go alone,  as  I  thought. The  king is  now
determined  to set out at  once.  Since the coming of the winged  shadow, he
desires to return to the hills under cover of night.'
'And then whither?' said Legolas.
'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered. 'As for the king, he will  go  to
the muster that he commanded at Edoras,  four  nights from now. And there, I
think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of Rohan  will go down to
Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .'
'I for one!' cried Legolas. 'And Gimli with him!' said the Dwarf.
'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me. I must go down
also to Minas Tirith, but I  do not yet see the  road. An hour long prepared
approaches.'
'Don't leave me behind!'  said Merry. 'I have not been of much use yet;
but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for when all is
over. I don't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though,
of  course, the  king did say that I was to sit by  him when  he came to his
house and tell him all about the Shire.'
'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I  think, Merry. But
do  not  look for mirth at  the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere Thjoden
sits  at ease  again  in  Meduseld.  Many hopes will wither  in this  bitter
Spring.'
Soon all were ready  to depart:  twenty-four horses, with Gimli  behind
Legolas,  and Merry  in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding swiftly
through the night. They had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen,
when a Rider galloped up from the rear of their line.
'My  lord,'  he said to  the king, 'there are horsemen behind us. As we
crossed the fords I thought that  I heard them. Now we  are sure.  They  are
