Chapter 2. The Passing of the Grey Company
Gandalf was gone, and the thudding  hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the
night, when Merry came  back to Aragorn. He  had only a light bundle, for he
had lost his pack at Parth  Galen, and all he had was a few useful things he
had picked up among the wreckage of  Isengard. Hasufel was  already saddled.
Legolas and Gimli with their horse stood close by.
'So four of the Company still remain,'  said Aragorn. 'We  will ride on
together.  But  we  shall  not  go alone,  as  I  thought. The  king is  now
determined  to set out at  once.  Since the coming of the winged  shadow, he
desires to return to the hills under cover of night.'
'And then whither?' said Legolas.
'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered. 'As for the king, he will  go  to
the muster that he commanded at Edoras,  four  nights from now. And there, I
think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of Rohan  will go down to
Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .'
'I for one!' cried Legolas. 'And Gimli with him!' said the Dwarf.
'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me. I must go down
also to Minas Tirith, but I  do not yet see the  road. An hour long prepared
approaches.'
'Don't leave me behind!'  said Merry. 'I have not been of much use yet;
but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for when all is
over. I don't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though,
of  course, the  king did say that I was to sit by  him when  he came to his
house and tell him all about the Shire.'
'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I  think, Merry. But
do  not  look for mirth at  the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere Thjoden
sits  at ease  again  in  Meduseld.  Many hopes will wither  in this  bitter
Spring.'
Soon all were ready  to depart:  twenty-four horses, with Gimli  behind
Legolas,  and Merry  in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding swiftly
through the night. They had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen,
when a Rider galloped up from the rear of their line.
'My  lord,'  he said to  the king, 'there are horsemen behind us. As we
crossed the fords I thought that  I heard them. Now we  are sure.  They  are
overtaking us, riding hard.'
Thjoden at once called a halt. The Riders turned about and seized their
spears.  Aragorn  dismounted and  set Merry on the  ground, and drawing  his
sword he stood by the king's stirrup. Jomer and his esquire rode back to the
rear. Merry felt more  like unneeded baggage than  ever, and he wondered, if
there was a fight, what  he should do. Supposing the king's small escort was
trapped and overcome, but  he escaped into the darkness  - alone in the wild
fields of Rohan  with no idea of where he was in all the  endless miles? 'No
good!' he thought. He drew his sword and tightened his belt.
The sinking moon was obscured by a great sailing cloud, but suddenly it
rode  out clear  again. Then they all  heard the sound of  hoofs, and at the
same moment they saw dark shapes coming  swiftly on the path from the fords.
The moonlight glinted here and there  on the points of spears. The number of
the pursuers could  not be told, but they seemed  no fewer than  the  king's
escort, at the least.
When they were some  fifty paces off,  Jomer  cried  in  a  loud voice:
'Halt! Halt! Who rides in Rohan?'
The  pursuers  brought  their  steeds  to  a sudden  stand.  A  silence
followed: and  then in the  moonlight, a  horseman could be seen dismounting
and walking  slowly  forward. His hand  showed white as  he held it up, palm
outward, in token of peace; but the king's men gripped their weapons. At ten
paces the man stopped. He was  tall,  a dark standing shadow. Then his clear
voice rang out.
'Rohan? Rohan did you say?  That is  a glad word.  We seek that land in
haste from long afar.'
'You have found it,' said Jomer. 'When you crossed the fords yonder you
entered it. But it is the realm of Thjoden  the King. None ride here save by
his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?'
'Halbarad D®nadan, Ranger  of the North I am,' cried the man. 'We  seek
one Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.'
'And  you have  found  him also!' cried  Aragorn. Giving his  reins  to
Merry, he ran  forward and embraced  the newcomer. 'Halbarad!' he said.  'Of
all joys this is the least expected!'
Merry breathed a sigh of relief. He had thought that this was some last
trick of Saruman's, to waylay  the king  while he  had  only a few men about
him;  but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Thjoden's defence,
not yet at any rate. He sheathed his sword.
'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back. 'Here are some of my own kin
from  the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many  they  be,
Halbarad shall tell us.'
'I  have thirty  with me,' said Halbarad. 'That is  all  of our kindred
that could be gathered in  haste; but the  brethren Elladan and Elrohir have
ridden with us, desiring to go to  the  war. We rode as swiftly as we  might
when your summons came.'
'But  I  did  not summon you,' said Aragorn,  'save  only  in wish.  My
thoughts have often turned to you, and seldom more than tonight; yet I  have
sent  no  word. But come! All such matters must wait. You find us riding  in
haste and danger. Ride with us now, if the king will give his leave.'
Thjoden was indeed glad of the news. 'It  is well!' he said.  'If these
kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights
will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.'
Then the Riders  set out again, and Aragorn  for a while rode with  the
D®nedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South,
Elrohir said to him:
'I bring word to you from my father:          The days are short. If thou art in
haste, remember the Paths of the Dead             .'
'Always my days  have seemed  to me  too short to  achieve  my desire,'
answered Aragorn. 'But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road.'
'That  will soon  be seen,' said Elrohir. 'But let us speak  no more of
these things upon the open road!'
And  Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is  that that  you bear, kinsman?'
For  he  saw that instead  of a  spear he bore a  tall  staff, as it were  a
standard, but it was close-furled  in a black cloth  bound about  with  many
thongs.
'It is a gift that  I bring  you  from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered
Halbarad.  'She wrought it in secret,  and long was the making. But she also
sends word  to you:       The days now are short.  Either our hope cometh, or  all
hopes end. Therefore I  send  thee what I have  made  for  thee. Fare  well,
Elfstone!   '
And Aragorn said:  'Now I  know  what you bear. Bear it still for  me a
while!' And  he turned and  looked away to the North under  the great stars,
and then he fell silent and spoke no more while the night's journey lasted.
The night  was old  and the East grey  when  they rode  up at last from
Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie and rest
