'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back. 'Here are some of my own kin
from  the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many  they  be,
Halbarad shall tell us.'
'I  have thirty  with me,' said Halbarad. 'That is  all  of our kindred
that could be gathered in  haste; but the  brethren Elladan and Elrohir have
ridden with us, desiring to go to  the  war. We rode as swiftly as we  might
when your summons came.'
'But  I  did  not summon you,' said Aragorn,  'save  only  in wish.  My
thoughts have often turned to you, and seldom more than tonight; yet I  have
sent  no  word. But come! All such matters must wait. You find us riding  in
haste and danger. Ride with us now, if the king will give his leave.'
Thjoden was indeed glad of the news. 'It  is well!' he said.  'If these
kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights
will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.'
Then the Riders  set out again, and Aragorn  for a while rode with  the
D®nedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South,
Elrohir said to him:
'I bring word to you from my father:          The days are short. If thou art in
haste, remember the Paths of the Dead             .'
'Always my days  have seemed  to me  too short to  achieve  my desire,'
answered Aragorn. 'But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road.'
'That  will soon  be seen,' said Elrohir. 'But let us speak  no more of
these things upon the open road!'
And  Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is  that that  you bear, kinsman?'
For  he  saw that instead  of a  spear he bore a  tall  staff, as it were  a
standard, but it was close-furled  in a black cloth  bound about  with  many
thongs.
'It is a gift that  I bring  you  from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered
Halbarad.  'She wrought it in secret,  and long was the making. But she also
sends word  to you:       The days now are short.  Either our hope cometh, or  all
hopes end. Therefore I  send  thee what I have  made  for  thee. Fare  well,
Elfstone!   '
And Aragorn said:  'Now I  know  what you bear. Bear it still for  me a
while!' And  he turned and  looked away to the North under  the great stars,
and then he fell silent and spoke no more while the night's journey lasted.
The night  was old  and the East grey  when  they rode  up at last from
Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie and rest
for a brief while and take counsel.
Merry  slept  until  he was  roused by Legolas and  Gimli.  'The Sun is
high,'  said Legolas. 'All others are  up and doing.  Come, Master Sluggard,
and look at this place while you may!'
'There  was a  battle here  three  nights ago,' said Gimli,  'and  here
Legolas and  I  played a game that I won only  by a single orc. Come and see
how it was!  And there  are caves, Merry, caves of  wonder!  Shall we  visit
them, Legolas, do you think?'
'Nay!  There is no  time,' said the Elf. 'Do  not spoil the wonder with
haste! I have given you my word to return hither with you, if a day of peace
and  freedom comes  again. But it is now near to noon, and  at that hour  we
eat, and then set out again, I hear.'
Merry  got up  and yawned. His few hours'  sleep  had not  been  nearly
enough; he was  tired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin,  and felt that he
was only a burden, while everybody was making plans for  speed in a business
that he did not fully understand. 'Where is Aragorn?' he asked.
'In a  high chamber of the Burg,' said  Legolas. 'He has neither rested
nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take
thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him;  but some dark doubt
or care sits on him.'
'They are a strange company, these  newcomers,'  said Gimli. 'Stout men
and lordly  they are,  and the  Riders  of Rohan look  almost as boys beside
them; for they are grim men  of face, worn like weathered rocks for the most
part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.'
'But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break  their silence.'
said  Legolas. 'And have  you marked  the brethren Elladan and Elrohir? Less
sombre is their  gear than  the  others', and  they are fair and  gallant as
Elven-lords;  and that  is not  to be wondered  at in the sons of  Elrond of
Rivendell.'
'Why have  they come? Have you heard?' asked Merry. He had now dressed,
and he flung  his grey cloak about his shoulders; and  the  three passed out
together towards the ruined gate of the Burg.
'They answered  a summons,  as you  heard,'  said Gimli. 'Word  came to
Rivendell, they  say:      Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the D®nedain ride
to him in Rohan!       But whence this message came they are now in doubt.
Gandalf
sent it, I would guess.'
'Nay, Galadriel,' said  Legolas. 'Did she not speak  through Gandalf of
the ride of the Grey Company from the North?'
'Yes,  you have it,' said Gimli. 'The Lady of  the Wood! She  read many
hearts and  desires. Now why did  not we wish for some  of our own kinsfolk,
Legolas?'
Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and
east, and his fair face was troubled. 'I do not  think that any would come,'
he answered. 'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their
own lands.'
For  a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and
that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate, and passed
the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road, until they stood
on  Helm's  Dike  and  looked into the Coomb. The Death Down  already  stood
there, black and  tall and stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the
grass by the Huorns could be  plainly  seen. The Dunlendings and many men of
the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about
the battered walls behind;  yet all seemed  strangely  quiet: a weary valley
resting after a  great storm. Soon they turned  back and went  to the midday
meal in the hall of the Burg.
The  king was already there, and as soon as they  entered he called for
Merry and  had a seat set for him at his side. 'It is not  as I  would  have
it,' said Thjoden; 'for this is little like  my  fair  house  in Edoras. And
your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we sit,
you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting
when  I return  thither. But  come  now!  Eat and drink,  and  let us  speak
together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.'
'May I?' said Merry, surprised and delighted. 'That would be splendid!'
He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. 'I am afraid I am
only in everybody's way,' he stammered; 'but  I should like to do anything I
could, you know.'
'I doubt  it not,' said the king.  'I have had  a  good  hill-pony made
ready for you. He will  bear you as swift as any horse by the  roads that we
shall  take. For I will ride  from the  Burg  by mountain paths, not  by the
plain, and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady Jowyn
awaits
me. You shall  be  my esquire,  if you  will.  Is  there gear of war in this
place, Jomer, that my sword-thain could use?'
