'Nay, Galadriel,' said  Legolas. 'Did she not speak  through Gandalf of
the ride of the Grey Company from the North?'
'Yes,  you have it,' said Gimli. 'The Lady of  the Wood! She  read many
hearts and  desires. Now why did  not we wish for some  of our own kinsfolk,
Legolas?'
Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and
east, and his fair face was troubled. 'I do not  think that any would come,'
he answered. 'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their
own lands.'
For  a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and
that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate, and passed
the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road, until they stood
on  Helm's  Dike  and  looked into the Coomb. The Death Down  already  stood
there, black and  tall and stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the
grass by the Huorns could be  plainly  seen. The Dunlendings and many men of
the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about
the battered walls behind;  yet all seemed  strangely  quiet: a weary valley
resting after a  great storm. Soon they turned  back and went  to the midday
meal in the hall of the Burg.
The  king was already there, and as soon as they  entered he called for
Merry and  had a seat set for him at his side. 'It is not  as I  would  have
it,' said Thjoden; 'for this is little like  my  fair  house  in Edoras. And
your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we sit,
you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting
when  I return  thither. But  come  now!  Eat and drink,  and  let us  speak
together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.'
'May I?' said Merry, surprised and delighted. 'That would be splendid!'
He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. 'I am afraid I am
only in everybody's way,' he stammered; 'but  I should like to do anything I
could, you know.'
'I doubt  it not,' said the king.  'I have had  a  good  hill-pony made
ready for you. He will  bear you as swift as any horse by the  roads that we
shall  take. For I will ride  from the  Burg  by mountain paths, not  by the
plain, and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady Jowyn
awaits
me. You shall  be  my esquire,  if you  will.  Is  there gear of war in this
place, Jomer, that my sword-thain could use?'
'There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord.' answered Jomer. 'Maybe a
light helm might be found to fit him; but  we have no  mail or sword for one
of his stature.'
'I have a sword,' said Merry, climbing from his  seat, and drawing from
its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love  for this
old man, he knelt on one knee,  and took  his hand and kissed it. 'May I lay
the  sword  of  Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap Thjoden  King?' he  cried.
'Receive my service, if you will!'
'Gladly will I take it,' said the king; and laying his  long old  hands
upon  the brown hair  of the hobbit;  he blessed  him. 'Rise  now, Meriadoc,
esquire  of Rohan of the household of  Meduseld!' he said.  'Take your sword
and bear it unto good fortune!'
'As a father you shall be to me,' said Merry.
'For a little while,' said Thjoden.
They talked then together as they ate, until presently Jomer spoke. 'It
is near the hour that we set for our going, lord,' he said. 'Shall I bid men
sound the horns? But where is  Aragorn?  His place is empty and  he  has not
eaten.'
'We  will make ready to ride,'  said Thjoden; 'but let  word be sent to
the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.'
The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from the gate
of  the Burg to  where the Riders were assembling  on  the green.  Many were
already mounted. It would be a  great company; for the king was leaving only
a small garrison in the Burg, and all who could be spared were riding to the
weapontake at  Edoras. A  thousand spears  had indeed already ridden away at
night; but still there would be some five hundred more to go  with the king,
for the most part men from the fields and dales of Westfold.
A little  apart  the Rangers sat, silent,  in an ordered company, armed
with  spear and bow  and sword. They were  clad in  cloaks of dark grey, and
their hoods were cast now over helm  and head. Their  horses were strong and
of  proud  bearing, but rough-haired; and  one stood there without  a rider,
Aragorn's own horse that they  had  brought from the North; Roheryn  was his
name. There was no gleam  of stone  or gold, nor any fair thing in all their
gear and harness: nor did their  riders bear any badge  or  token, save only
that each  cloak was  pinned  upon the  left shoulder by a brooch of  silver
shaped like a rayed star.
The  king mounted his horse, Snowmane,  and Merry sat beside him on his
pony: Stybba was his name. Presently Jomer came out from the gate, and  with
him was Aragorn, and Halbarad bearing the great staff close-furled in black,
and two tall men, neither young nor old So much alike were they, the sons of
Elrond,  that few could tell  them apart: dark-haired,  grey-eyed, and their
faces elven-fair,  clad  alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver-grey.
Behind them walked Legolas and  Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for
Aragorn,
so startling  was the  change that he saw  in  him, as if in one  night many
years had fallen on his head. Grim was his face, grey-hued and weary.
'I  am troubled in mind, lord,'  he said, standing by the king's horse.
'I have  heard strange words,  and I see new perils far off. I have laboured
long  in thought, and  now  I fear that I must change my  purpose. Tell  me,
Thjoden, you ride now to Dunharrow, how long will it be ere you come there?'
'It is now a full hour past noon,' said Jomer. 'Before the night of the
third day  from  now we should  come to the Hold. The Moon will then be  one
night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the
day after. More  speed we cannot make, if  the strength of  Rohan  is to  be
gathered.'
Aragorn  was  silent for a moment. 'Three days,' he murmured, 'and  the
muster  of Rohan will  only  be begun. But  I  see  that  it  cannot now  be
hastened.'  He looked up, and it seemed that  he had made some decision; his
face  was less troubled. Then, by  our leave, lord, I must take new  counsel
for myself  and my  kindred. We must  ride  our  own road, and  no longer in
secret. For me  the time of stealth  has  passed.  I  will ride east by  the
swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.'
'The Paths of the Dead!' said Thjoden, and trembled. 'Why do  you speak
of them?' Jomer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the
faces of  the Riders  that sat within  hearing turned pale at the words. 'If
there be in  truth  such paths,' said Thjoden, 'their gate  is in Dunharrow;
but no living man may pass it.'
'Alas! Aragorn my friend!' said Jomer. 'I had hoped that we should ride
to war together; but if you seek the  Paths of the Dead, then our parting is
come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.'
'That road  I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn. 'But I say to you,
Jomer, that in battle  we may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor
should stand between.'
'You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,' said Thjoden.  'It  is your
