pony: Stybba was his name. Presently Jomer came out from the gate, and  with
him was Aragorn, and Halbarad bearing the great staff close-furled in black,
and two tall men, neither young nor old So much alike were they, the sons of
Elrond,  that few could tell  them apart: dark-haired,  grey-eyed, and their
faces elven-fair,  clad  alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver-grey.
Behind them walked Legolas and  Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for
Aragorn,
so startling  was the  change that he saw  in  him, as if in one  night many
years had fallen on his head. Grim was his face, grey-hued and weary.
'I  am troubled in mind, lord,'  he said, standing by the king's horse.
'I have  heard strange words,  and I see new perils far off. I have laboured
long  in thought, and  now  I fear that I must change my  purpose. Tell  me,
Thjoden, you ride now to Dunharrow, how long will it be ere you come there?'
'It is now a full hour past noon,' said Jomer. 'Before the night of the
third day  from  now we should  come to the Hold. The Moon will then be  one
night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the
day after. More  speed we cannot make, if  the strength of  Rohan  is to  be
gathered.'
Aragorn  was  silent for a moment. 'Three days,' he murmured, 'and  the
muster  of Rohan will  only  be begun. But  I  see  that  it  cannot now  be
hastened.'  He looked up, and it seemed that  he had made some decision; his
face  was less troubled. Then, by  our leave, lord, I must take new  counsel
for myself  and my  kindred. We must  ride  our  own road, and  no longer in
secret. For me  the time of stealth  has  passed.  I  will ride east by  the
swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.'
'The Paths of the Dead!' said Thjoden, and trembled. 'Why do  you speak
of them?' Jomer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the
faces of  the Riders  that sat within  hearing turned pale at the words. 'If
there be in  truth  such paths,' said Thjoden, 'their gate  is in Dunharrow;
but no living man may pass it.'
'Alas! Aragorn my friend!' said Jomer. 'I had hoped that we should ride
to war together; but if you seek the  Paths of the Dead, then our parting is
come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.'
'That road  I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn. 'But I say to you,
Jomer, that in battle  we may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor
should stand between.'
'You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,' said Thjoden.  'It  is your
doom, maybe,  to  tread  strange paths that  others  dare not.  This parting
grieves  me, and  my strength  is  lessened by it; but now  I must take  the
mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!'
'Farewell,  lord!' said  Aragorn.  'Ride unto great  renown!  Farewell,
Merry! I leave you in  good hands,  better  than we hoped when we hunted the
orcs to Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli  will still hunt with me,  I hope; but we
shall not forget you.'
'Good-bye!'  said  Merry.  He could find no more to say.  He  felt very
small, and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words. More than
ever he  missed the  unquenchable cheerfulness  of Pippin.  The  Riders were
ready, and their horses were fidgeting;  he wished they would start arid get
it over.
Now Thjoden  spoke to Jomer, and he lifted up his hand and cried aloud,
and  with that word the Riders set forth. They  rode over the Dike  and down
the  Coomb,  and  then,  turning swiftly  eastwards, they  took  a path that
skirted  the foothills for a  mile or so, until bending south it passed back
among the hills  and disappeared from view.  Aragorn  rode  to  the Dike and
watched till  the king's men  were far down  the  Coomb.  Then he turned  to
Halbarad.
'There go three that I love, and the  smallest not the least,' he said.
'He knows not to what end he rides; yet if he knew, he still would go on.'
'A  little  people,  but  of  great worth  are  the  Shire-folk,'  said
Halbarad. 'Little do they  know of  our long  labour  for the safekeeping of
their borders, and yet I grudge it not.'
'And now our fates are  woven together,' said Aragorn. 'And yet,  alas!
here we must  part. Well, I must eat a little, and  then we also must hasten
away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you as I eat.'
Together they went back into  the  Burg; yet for some  time Aragorn sat
silent at  the  table in the  hall, and the others waited  for him to speak.
'Come!'  said  Legolas  at last. 'Speak and be  comforted, and shake off the
shadow! What has happened since we came  back to this grim place in the grey
morning?'
'A  struggle  somewhat grimmer  for  my  part than  the  battle of  the
Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I have  looked  in the Stone of  Orthanc,  my
friends.'
'You have  looked in that accursed stone of  wizardry!' exclaimed Gimli
with  fear  and astonishment in his face. 'Did  you say aught to - him? Even
Gandalf feared that encounter.'
'You  forget  to whom  you speak,' said  Aragorn sternly, and his  eyes
glinted. 'Did I not openly proclaim  my  title before  the doors  of Edoras?
What do you fear that I should say to him? Nay, Gimli,' he said  in a softer
voice,  and  the grimness left  his face, and  he looked  like  one who  has
laboured  in sleepless pain for many nights.  'Nay, my  friends,  I  and the
lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use
it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted.  The strength was  enough -
barely.'
He drew a deep breath. 'It was  a bitter struggle, and the weariness is
slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched the Stone to
my own  will. That alone he will find hard to endure. And he beheld me. Yes,
Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise than you  see  me here. If  that
will aid him, then I  have  done ill. But I do not think so. To  know that I
lived  and walked the earth was a blow  to his heart, I deem; for he knew it
not till now. The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Thjoden;
but Sauron has not  forgotten Isildur and the  sword of  Elendil. Now in the
very  hour  of  his  great  designs the  heir of  Isildur and the  Sword are
revealed; for l showed the blade re-forged  to him. He is not so mighty  yet
that he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.'
'But he wields  great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli;  'and now  he
will strike more swiftly.'
'The hasty  stroke  goes oft astray,' said Aragorn. 'We must press  our
Enemy, and no longer wait upon him  for the move. See my friends, when I had
mastered  the  Stone,  I  learned many things.  A grave peril I  saw  coming
unlooked-for upon Gondor  from the  South that will  draw off great strength
from the defence of Minas Tirith. If  it  is not countered  swiftly,  I deem
that the City will be lost ere ten days be gone.'
'Then lost it must be,'  said Gimli. 'For  what  help is  there to send
thither, and how could it come there in time?'
'I have  no help  to send,  therefore I must go myself,'  said Aragorn.
'But there is only one way through the mountains  that will  bring me to the
coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.'
'The Paths of the Dead!' said Gimli.  'It is a fell name; and little to
the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and
not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter
the strokes of Mordor?'
