Gandalf feared that encounter.'
'You  forget  to whom  you speak,' said  Aragorn sternly, and his  eyes
glinted. 'Did I not openly proclaim  my  title before  the doors  of Edoras?
What do you fear that I should say to him? Nay, Gimli,' he said  in a softer
voice,  and  the grimness left  his face, and  he looked  like  one who  has
laboured  in sleepless pain for many nights.  'Nay, my  friends,  I  and the
lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use
it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted.  The strength was  enough -
barely.'
He drew a deep breath. 'It was  a bitter struggle, and the weariness is
slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched the Stone to
my own  will. That alone he will find hard to endure. And he beheld me. Yes,
Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise than you  see  me here. If  that
will aid him, then I  have  done ill. But I do not think so. To  know that I
lived  and walked the earth was a blow  to his heart, I deem; for he knew it
not till now. The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Thjoden;
but Sauron has not  forgotten Isildur and the  sword of  Elendil. Now in the
very  hour  of  his  great  designs the  heir of  Isildur and the  Sword are
revealed; for l showed the blade re-forged  to him. He is not so mighty  yet
that he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.'
'But he wields  great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli;  'and now  he
will strike more swiftly.'
'The hasty  stroke  goes oft astray,' said Aragorn. 'We must press  our
Enemy, and no longer wait upon him  for the move. See my friends, when I had
mastered  the  Stone,  I  learned many things.  A grave peril I  saw  coming
unlooked-for upon Gondor  from the  South that will  draw off great strength
from the defence of Minas Tirith. If  it  is not countered  swiftly,  I deem
that the City will be lost ere ten days be gone.'
'Then lost it must be,'  said Gimli. 'For  what  help is  there to send
thither, and how could it come there in time?'
'I have  no help  to send,  therefore I must go myself,'  said Aragorn.
'But there is only one way through the mountains  that will  bring me to the
coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.'
'The Paths of the Dead!' said Gimli.  'It is a fell name; and little to
the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and
not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter
the strokes of Mordor?'
'The  living  have  never  used that  road  since  the  coming  of  the
Rohirrim,' said Aragorn, 'for it is closed to  them.  But  in this dark hour
the heir of Isildur may use  it, if he  dare. Listen! This is the word  that
the sons of  Elrond bring  to  me  from their father in Rivendell, wisest in
lore:  Bid  Aragorn remember  the words  of the  seer,  and the Paths of  the
Dead   .'
'And what may be the words of the seer?' said Legolas.
"Thus spoke  Malbeth the  Seer,  in the days of  Arvedui,  last king at
Fornost,' said Aragorn:
Over the land there lies a long shadow,
westward reaching wings of darkness.
The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings
doom approaches. The Dead awaken;
for the hour is come for the oathbreakers;
at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again
and hear there a horn in the hills ringing.
Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them
from the prey twilight, the forgotten people?
The heir of him to whom the oath they swore.
From the North shall he come, need shall drive him:
he shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead.
'Dark ways doubtless, said  Gimli, but no darker than these staves  are
to me.'
'If you  would  understand them better, then I bid  you  come with me,'
said Aragorn; 'for that way I now shall take. But I do  not go  gladly; only
need drives me. Therefore, only of your free will would I have you come, for
you will find both toil and great fear, and maybe worse.'
'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever, end
they may lead,' said Gimli.
'I also will come,' said Legolas, 'for I do not fear the Dead.'
'I  hope  that the  forgotten people  will  not have  forgotten how  to
fight,' said Gimli; 'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.'
'That we shall know if ever  we come to Erech,' said  Aragorn. 'But the
oath  that  they broke  was  to  fight  against Sauron, and they must  fight
therefore,  if  they are to fulfil it. For at Erech there stands yet a black
stone that was brought, it was said, from N®menor by Isildur; and it was set
upon a hill, and  upon it  the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to him
in  the beginning of the realm of Gondor. But when Sauron returned and  grew
in might again, Isildur summoned the  Men of  the Mountains to  fulfil their
oath, and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years.
'Then Isildur said to  their king: "Thou shalt be the last king. And if
the West prove mightier than thy  Black Master, this curse  I  lay upon thee
and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is  fulfilled. For this war will
last through years uncounted, and you  shall be summoned once again ere  the
end."  And they fled  before  the  wrath of  Isildur, and did not dare to go
forth to war on  Sauron's  part; and they hid themselves in secret places in
the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the
barren hills. And the  terror of the Sleepless Dead lies  about  the Hill of
Erech and all places  where that people  lingered. But that  way I  must go,
since there are none living to help me.'
He stood up.  'Come!' he  cried, and drew his sword, and it  flashed in
the twilit hall of the Burg. 'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the
Dead. Come with me who will!'
Legolas  and Gimli  made no answer,  but they rose and followed Aragorn
from the  hall.  On  the green  there waited,  still and silent, the  hooded
Rangers.  Legolas  and Gimli  mounted.  Aragorn  sprang upon  Roheryn.
Then
Halbarad lifted a great horn, and the blast of it echoed in Helm's Deep; and
with that they leapt away, riding down the Coomb like thunder, while all the
men that were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze.
And  while Thjoden  went  by slow paths in the hills, the Grey  Company
passed  swiftly  over the plain, and on the next day  in the  afternoon they
came to Edoras;  and there they halted only briefly, ere they passed up  the
valley, and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell.
The  Lady  Jowyn greeted  them  and  was  glad of  their coming; for no
mightier men had she seen than the D®nedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but
on Aragorn most of  all her eyes rested.  And when  they sat at supper  with
her, they talked  together, and  she heard  of  all that  had  passed  since
Thjoden rode away, concerning which only hasty tidings  had yet reached her;
and when  she  heard of the battle in Helm's Deep and the great slaughter of
their foes,  and of  the charge of  Thjoden and  his knights, then  her eyes
shone.
But at last she said:  'Lords, you are weary and  shall now go to  your
beds  with  such ease  as can  be contrived in  haste.  But  tomorrow fairer
