in  the beginning of the realm of Gondor. But when Sauron returned and  grew
in might again, Isildur summoned the  Men of  the Mountains to  fulfil their
oath, and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years.
'Then Isildur said to  their king: "Thou shalt be the last king. And if
the West prove mightier than thy  Black Master, this curse  I  lay upon thee
and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is  fulfilled. For this war will
last through years uncounted, and you  shall be summoned once again ere  the
end."  And they fled  before  the  wrath of  Isildur, and did not dare to go
forth to war on  Sauron's  part; and they hid themselves in secret places in
the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the
barren hills. And the  terror of the Sleepless Dead lies  about  the Hill of
Erech and all places  where that people  lingered. But that  way I  must go,
since there are none living to help me.'
He stood up.  'Come!' he  cried, and drew his sword, and it  flashed in
the twilit hall of the Burg. 'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the
Dead. Come with me who will!'
Legolas  and Gimli  made no answer,  but they rose and followed Aragorn
from the  hall.  On  the green  there waited,  still and silent, the  hooded
Rangers.  Legolas  and Gimli  mounted.  Aragorn  sprang upon  Roheryn.
Then
Halbarad lifted a great horn, and the blast of it echoed in Helm's Deep; and
with that they leapt away, riding down the Coomb like thunder, while all the
men that were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze.
And  while Thjoden  went  by slow paths in the hills, the Grey  Company
passed  swiftly  over the plain, and on the next day  in the  afternoon they
came to Edoras;  and there they halted only briefly, ere they passed up  the
valley, and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell.
The  Lady  Jowyn greeted  them  and  was  glad of  their coming; for no
mightier men had she seen than the D®nedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but
on Aragorn most of  all her eyes rested.  And when  they sat at supper  with
her, they talked  together, and  she heard  of  all that  had  passed  since
Thjoden rode away, concerning which only hasty tidings  had yet reached her;
and when  she  heard of the battle in Helm's Deep and the great slaughter of
their foes,  and of  the charge of  Thjoden and  his knights, then  her eyes
shone.
But at last she said:  'Lords, you are weary and  shall now go to  your
beds  with  such ease  as can  be contrived in  haste.  But  tomorrow fairer
housing shall be found for you.'
But Aragorn said:  'Nay, lady, be  not troubled  for  us! If we may lie
here tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it  will be enough. For  I ride on
an errand most urgent, and with the first light of morning we must go.'
She smiled  on him and said: 'Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so
many miles out of your  way to bring tidings to Jowyn, and to speak with her
in her exile.'
'Indeed no man would count such a  journey  wasted,' said Aragorn; 'and
yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if  it were not that the road which
I must take leads me to Dunharrow.'
And she answered  as one  that likes not what is said: "Then, lord, you
are astray; for out of  Harrowdale no road  runs east or south; and  you had
best return as you came.'
'Nay, lady,' said  he, 'I am  not astray; for I walked in this land ere
you were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and that road
I shall take. Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead.'
Then she stared at him as one that is stricken,  and her face blanched,
and  for long she  spoke no more, while all sat silent. 'But, Aragorn,'  she
said at last,  'is it then your errand to  seek death? For that  is all that
you will find on that road. They do not suffer the living to pass.'
'They may suffer me  to pass,' said Aragorn; 'but at the  least I  will
adventure it. No other road will serve.'
'But  this  is  madness,' she  said.  'For  here are  men of renown and
prowess, whom you should not take into the shadows, but  should lead to war,
where men are needed. I beg you to remain and ride with my brother; for then
all our hearts will be gladdened, and our hope be the brighter.'
'It is  not madness, lady,' he answered; 'for I go on a path appointed.
But those who follow  me do so of  their free will; and if they wish now  to
remain and ride  with the  Rohirrim,  they  may do so. But  I shall take the
Paths of the Dead, alone, if needs be.'
Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever
upon Aragorn, and the others  saw that she  was in great torment of mind. At
length they arose, and took their leave of the Lady, and thanked her for her
care, and went to their rest.
But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and
Gimli, and  his companions had  gone in. there came the Lady Jowyn after him
and called to him. He turned and saw her  as a glimmer in the night, for she
was clad in white; but her eyes were on fire.
'Aragorn,' she said, 'why will you go on this deadly road?'
'Because I must,' he said. 'Only so can I see any hope of doing my part
in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, Jowyn. Were I  to
go where my  heart dwells, far  in the North I would now be wandering in the
fair valley of Rivendell.'
For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this  might mean. Then
suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. 'You are  a stern lord and resolute,'
she said; 'and thus  do  men  win renown.' She paused. 'Lord.' she said, 'if
you must go, then let me ride in your  following. For I am weary of skulking
in the hills, and wish to face peril and battle.'
'Your duty is with your people,' he answered.
'Too often have I heard of duty,' she cried. 'But am I not of the House
of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet
long enough.  Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not  now spend my
life as I will?'
'Few may do that with honour,' he answered.  'But as for you, lady: did
you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? If
you had not been chosen, then some marshal or captain would have been set in
the same place, and he could not ride away from his charge, were he weary of
it or no.'
'Shall I always be chosen?' she  said bitterly. 'Shall I always be left
behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they  win renown, and
find food and beds when they return?'
'A time may come  soon,' said he, 'when none  will return.  Then  there
will be need of valour  without  renown,  for none shall remember the  deeds
that  are done in  the last defence of your homes. Yet the deeds will not be
less valiant because they are unpraised.'
And she answered: 'All  your words are but to say: you are a woman, and
your part is in the house. But when  the men have died in battle and honour,
you have leave to  be burned in the house, for the men will need it no more.
But I  am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and wield
blade, and I do not fear either pain or death.'
'What do you fear, lady?' he asked.
'A cage,' she said. 'To stay behind bars, until use and old age  accept
them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.'
'And  yet you  counselled  me  not  to adventure on the road that I had
