black he was  himself, too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want
to be known. "Now what  in the Shire  can  he want?" I thought to myself. We
don't see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anyway I had never heard
of any like this black fellow.
' "Good-day to you!" I says,  going  out to him. "This  lane don't lead
anywhere,  and wherever  you may be going, your quickest way will be back to
the road." I didn't like the looks of  him; and when  Grip came out, he took
one sniff and  let out a  yelp as if he had been slung: he put down his tail
and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still.
' "I come  from yonder," he  said,  slow  and stiff-like, pointing back
west, over    my   fields, if you please.  "Have you seen          Baggins?"     he asked in a
queer voice,  and bent  down towards  me. I could not see any face,  for his
hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down  my back. But  I did
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold.
' "Be off!" I said. "There are no Bagginses  here.  You're in the wrong
part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton - but you can  go
by road this time."
' "Baggins has  left,"  he answered in a whisper. "He is coming. He  is
not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come
back with gold."
' "No you won't," I said.  "You'll  go back  where you  belong,  double
quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs."
'He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not.
Then he spurred  his great  horse right  at me, and I jumped  out of the way
only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the
gate  and up the lane  towards the causeway like a bolt  of thunder. What do
you think of that?'
Frodo sat for a moment looking at  the fire,  but  his only thought was
how on earth would they  reach the Ferry. 'I don't  know what  to think,' he
said at last.
'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never have
gone  mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo.  Folk  are queer  up
there.'  Sam  stirred in  his  chair,  and  looked  at  the  farmer  with an
unfriendly  eye. 'But you were always a  reckless lad. When  I heard you had
left the Brandybucks  and  gone  off  to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this  all comes of those  strange
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion  in foreign
parts, they  say. Maybe there is some that want  to know what has  become of
the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?'
Frodo said  nothing:  the  shrewd  guesses of  the farmer  were  rather
disconcerting.
'Well, Mr. Frodo,' Maggot went  on, 'I'm glad that you've had the sense
to come back to Buckland. My  advice is: stay  there! And don't get mixed up
with these outlandish folk.  You'll have  friends  in these parts. If any of
these black  fellows come after you  again,  I'll  deal with  them. I'll say
you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of.'
'Maybe you're right,' said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staring
at the fire.
Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. 'Well, I see  you have ideas of your
own,' he said. 'It is as plain as my  nose that no  accident brought you and
that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my  news was no  great news
to you, after all.  I am not asking you to tell me anything you  have a mind
to keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind  of trouble. Perhaps you
are thinking it won't be too easy to get to the Ferry without being caught?'
'I was thinking so,' said Frodo. 'But we have got to try and get there;
and  it won't  be  done by sitting  and thinking. So I am afraid we must  be
going.  Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of
you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh
to hear it. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to
leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day - if I get a chance.'
'You'll be welcome when you come,' said Maggot. 'But now I've a notion.
It's near  sundown  already,  and we are going to  have our  supper; for  we
mostly go to bed  soon after the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and  all could
stay and have a bite with us, we would be pleased!'
'And so should we!' said  Frodo. 'But  we  must  be going at once,  I'm
afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.'
'Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I'll
gel out a small waggon,  and I'll drive you all to the Ferry. That will save
you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of another sort.'
Frodo  now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief  of Pippin
and  Sam. The sun  was  already behind the  western hills, and the light was
failing.  Two  of  Maggot's  sons  and his  three  daughters came in, and  a
generous  supper was  laid  on the large table.  The kitchen  was  lit  with
candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot  hustled in and out. One or two
other  hobbits  belonging to the farm-household came in.  In  a short  while
fourteen  sat  down to eat. There  was beer in plenty,  and a mighty dish of
mushrooms  and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The  dogs lay
by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones.
When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern
and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out.
They  threw their  packs  on board  and  climbed in. The farmer sat  in  the
driving-seat,  and whipped up his two stout  ponies. His  wife stood  in the
light of the open door.
'You  be  careful  of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't  go arguing
with any foreigners, and come straight back!'
'I will!' said he, and drove out  of the gate. There was  now no breath
of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air.
They went without  lights and took it  slowly. After  a mile or two the lane
came to an end, crossing a deep dike,  and climbing a short slope up  on  to
the high-banked causeway.
Maggot got down and took a good look  either way, north and  south, but
nothing could  be  seen  in the darkness, and  there was not a sound in  the
still  air.  Thin  strands  of river-mist  were hanging above the dikes, and
crawling over the fields.
'It's going  to be thick,' said Maggot; 'but  I'll not light my lantern
till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet it
tonight.'
It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The  hobbits
wrapped themselves  up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the
creak  of  the wheels and the  slow          clop   of  the ponies' hoofs.  The  waggon
seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him  Pippin was  nodding towards
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog.
They reached the  entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked  by
two tall white posts  that suddenly loomed up  on their right. Farmer Maggot
drew  in his  ponies  and the  waggon creaked  to a  halt.  They  were  just
beginning  lo scramble out, when suddenly they heard what  they had all been
dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them.
Maggot  jumped  down  and stood holding the  ponies' heads, and peering
forward into the gloom.        Clip-clop, clip-clop      came the approaching rider. The
fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air.
