was clad in white; but her eyes were on fire.
'Aragorn,' she said, 'why will you go on this deadly road?'
'Because I must,' he said. 'Only so can I see any hope of doing my part
in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, Jowyn. Were I  to
go where my  heart dwells, far  in the North I would now be wandering in the
fair valley of Rivendell.'
For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this  might mean. Then
suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. 'You are  a stern lord and resolute,'
she said; 'and thus  do  men  win renown.' She paused. 'Lord.' she said, 'if
you must go, then let me ride in your  following. For I am weary of skulking
in the hills, and wish to face peril and battle.'
'Your duty is with your people,' he answered.
'Too often have I heard of duty,' she cried. 'But am I not of the House
of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet
long enough.  Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not  now spend my
life as I will?'
'Few may do that with honour,' he answered.  'But as for you, lady: did
you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? If
you had not been chosen, then some marshal or captain would have been set in
the same place, and he could not ride away from his charge, were he weary of
it or no.'
'Shall I always be chosen?' she  said bitterly. 'Shall I always be left
behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they  win renown, and
find food and beds when they return?'
'A time may come  soon,' said he, 'when none  will return.  Then  there
will be need of valour  without  renown,  for none shall remember the  deeds
that  are done in  the last defence of your homes. Yet the deeds will not be
less valiant because they are unpraised.'
And she answered: 'All  your words are but to say: you are a woman, and
your part is in the house. But when  the men have died in battle and honour,
you have leave to  be burned in the house, for the men will need it no more.
But I  am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and wield
blade, and I do not fear either pain or death.'
'What do you fear, lady?' he asked.
'A cage,' she said. 'To stay behind bars, until use and old age  accept
them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.'
'And  yet you  counselled  me  not  to adventure on the road that I had
chosen, because it is perilous?'
'So may one counsel another,' she said. 'Yet I do not bid you flee from
peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and victory.  I
would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast away needlessly.'
'Nor would I,' he  said. 'Therefore  I  say to you, lady: Stay! For you
have no errand to the South.'
'Neither have those others who go with thee. They go  only because they
would not be parted from thee - because they love thee.' Then she turned and
vanished into the night.
When the light of day was come into the  sky  but  the sun was  not yet
risen above the high  ridges in the East,  Aragorn made ready to depart. His
company was all mounted, and he was  about to leap into the saddle, when the
Lady  Jowyn came to bid them farewell. She was clad as a Rider and girt with
a sword. In her hand she bore a cup, and  she set it to her lips and drank a
little, wishing them  good speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn,  and
he drank, and he said:  'Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of
your House, and of you, and of all  your people. Say to your brother: beyond
the shadows we may meet again!'
Then it seemed to Gimli  and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and
in one  so  stern and proud that seemed  the  more grievous.  But  she said:
'Aragorn, wilt thou go?'
'I will,' he said.
'Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?'
'I will not, lady,' he said. 'For that I  could not grant without leave
of the king and  of  your brother; and they will not return until  tomorrow.
But I count now every hour, indeed every minute. Farewell!'
Then she fell on her knees, saying: 'I beg thee!'
'Nay, lady,' he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her. Then he
kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away, and did not look
back; and only  those who knew  him well and were  near to him saw  the pain
that he bore.
But Jowyn stood still as  a figure carven in stone,  her hands clenched
at her sides, and she watched  them until they passed into the shadows under
the  black Dwimorberg,  the Haunted Mountain, in which was  the Gate of  the
Dead.  When they were lost  to view, she turned,  stumbling  as  one that is
blind, and went back to her lodging. But none of her folk  saw this parting,
for they hid themselves in fear and would not come forth until  the  day was
up, and the reckless strangers were gone.
And some  said: 'They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong,
into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil enough.'
The light was  still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before  them. A dread  fell on
them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to
the Dimholt.  There under the  gloom of  black  trees  that not even Legolas
could long  endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root,
and right in their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom.
'My blood runs chill,'  said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his
voice fell dead on  the  dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses  would not
pass the threatening stone, until the riders dismounted and led them  about.
And so they came at last deep into the glen; and there stood a sheer wall of
rock, and in  the wall the Dark  Door  gaped  before them like  the mouth of
night.  Signs and figures were  carved above its  wide arch too dim to read,
and fear flowed from it like a grey vapour.
The company halted, and there was  not a  heart among them that did not
quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts
of Men have no terror.
'This is an  evil door,' said Halbarad, 'and my death lies beyond it. I
will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.'
'But  we must go  in,  and therefore  the horses  must  go  too,'  said
Aragorn.  'For if ever  we  come  through this  darkness,  many  leagues lie
beyond, and every hour  that is lost there will bring the triumph  of Sauron
nearer. Follow me!'
Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that
hour  that all the D®nedain and  their horses  followed him. And  indeed the
love that the horses of the Rangers bore for their riders was  so great that
they were willing  to face even the  terror  of the Door, if  their masters'
hearts were steady as they walked beside them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan,
refused  the  way, and he stood sweating and trembling  in a  fear  that was
grievous to see. Then Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words
that  went  soft in the  gloom, until he  suffered himself  to  be  led, and
Legolas passed in. And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone.
His knees shook,  and  he  was wroth  with himself.  'Here is  a  thing
unheard of!' he said. 'An  Elf  will go underground and a  Dwarf  dare not!'
With that he plunged in. But it seemed to him  that he dragged his feet like
