up, and the reckless strangers were gone.
And some  said: 'They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong,
into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil enough.'
The light was  still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before  them. A dread  fell on
them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to
the Dimholt.  There under the  gloom of  black  trees  that not even Legolas
could long  endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root,
and right in their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom.
'My blood runs chill,'  said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his
voice fell dead on  the  dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses  would not
pass the threatening stone, until the riders dismounted and led them  about.
And so they came at last deep into the glen; and there stood a sheer wall of
rock, and in  the wall the Dark  Door  gaped  before them like  the mouth of
night.  Signs and figures were  carved above its  wide arch too dim to read,
and fear flowed from it like a grey vapour.
The company halted, and there was  not a  heart among them that did not
quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts
of Men have no terror.
'This is an  evil door,' said Halbarad, 'and my death lies beyond it. I
will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.'
'But  we must go  in,  and therefore  the horses  must  go  too,'  said
Aragorn.  'For if ever  we  come  through this  darkness,  many  leagues lie
beyond, and every hour  that is lost there will bring the triumph  of Sauron
nearer. Follow me!'
Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that
hour  that all the D®nedain and  their horses  followed him. And  indeed the
love that the horses of the Rangers bore for their riders was  so great that
they were willing  to face even the  terror  of the Door, if  their masters'
hearts were steady as they walked beside them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan,
refused  the  way, and he stood sweating and trembling  in a  fear  that was
grievous to see. Then Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words
that  went  soft in the  gloom, until he  suffered himself  to  be  led, and
Legolas passed in. And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone.
His knees shook,  and  he  was wroth  with himself.  'Here is  a  thing
unheard of!' he said. 'An  Elf  will go underground and a  Dwarf  dare not!'
With that he plunged in. But it seemed to him  that he dragged his feet like
lead over the threshold; and at once a blindness  came  upon him,  even upon
Gimli Gluin's son who had walked unafraid in many deep places of the world.
Aragorn  had  brought  torches from Dunharrow,  and  now he went  ahead
bearing one  aloft; and Elladan with  another went  at the rear, and  Gimli,
stumbling behind, strove to overtake him. He could  see nothing  but the dim
flame  of the torches; but  if the company halted, there  seemed  an endless
whisper of voices all about him, a murmur of words in no tongue  that he had
ever heard before.
Nothing assailed  the  company  nor  withstood  their passage,  and yet
steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as  he went on:  most of all because he knew
now that there could be no  turning back; all the paths behind were thronged
by an unseen host that followed in the dark.
So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli  saw a  sight that he  was  ever
afterwards loth to recall. The road was  wide, as far as he could judge, but
now the company came  suddenly  into a great empty space, and there  were no
longer any walls upon either side. The dread  was  so  heavy on him  that he
could  hardly walk. Away  to the  left  something glittered  in the gloom as
Aragorn's  torch drew near.  Then Aragorn halted and  went  to look  what it
might be.
'Does  he  feel no fear?' muttered the  Dwarf. 'In any other cave Gimli
Gluin's son would have been  the first to run to the gleam of gold.  But not
here! Let it lie!'
Nonetheless he drew near,  and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held
aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of  a  mighty man. He had been
clad  in  mail, and still his harness lay there  whole; for the cavern's air
was as dry as dust, and his  hauberk  was gilded. His belt  was  of gold and
garnets, and rich with gold was the helm upon his bony head face downward on
the floor. He  had fallen  near the far  wall  of the cave, as now could  be
seen, and before  him stood a  stony door closed fast: his finger-bones were
still clawing at the cracks. A notched and broken sword lay by him, as if he
had hewn at the rock in his last despair.
Aragorn did  not touch him, but after gazing silently for  a  while  he
rose  and sighed. 'Hither  shall the flowers of            simbelmynl      come never  unto
world's  end,' he murmured. 'Nine mounds and seven there are now  green with
grass, and through all the long years he has lain at the door that  he could
not unlock. Whither does it lead? Why would he pass? None shall ever know!
'For that is not my errand!' he cried, turning back and speaking to the
whispering darkness behind. 'Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the
Accursed Years! Speed only we ask.  Let us pass, and then come! I summon
you
to the Stone of Erech!'
There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than
the whispers  before;  and  then  a chill  blast came in  which  the torches
flickered and  went  out,  and could not be  rekindled.  Of  the  time  that
followed, one hour  or many, Gimli remembered little. The others pressed on,
but  he  was ever hindmost, pursued  by a groping horror that  seemed always
just  about to seize  him; and a rumour came after him like the shadow-sound
of many feet. He  stumbled  on until he  was  crawling  like a beast on  the
ground and felt that he could endure no more: he  must either find an ending
and escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear.
Suddenly he  heard the  tinkle of water, a sound hard and  clear  as  a
stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light  grew, and lo! the  company
passed  through another  gateway, high-arched and broad, and a rill  ran out
beside  them;  and  beyond, going  steeply  down, was  a road between  sheer
cliffs, knife-edged against the sky  far above.  So deep and narrow was that
chasm  that  the sky was  dark, and in it small stars  glinted. Yet as Gimli
after learned it was still two hours ere sunset of the day on which they had
set out from Dunharrow; though for all that he could then tell it might have
been twilight in some later year, or in some other world.
The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They
rode
in  file, and evening came on and a  deep blue  dusk; and still fear pursued
them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before
his face  the glitter in the Elf's  bright  eyes. Behind them rode  Elladan,
last of the Company, but not the last of those that took the downward road.
'The  Dead are following,'  said Legolas. 'I  see shapes  of Men and of
horses,  and  pale  banners  like   shreds   of   cloud,  and   spears  like
winter-thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.'
'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,' said Elladan.
The Company  came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as it they had
issued  from  a crack in a wall; and there  lay the uplands  of a great vale
before them,  and the stream  beside them went down with a  cold  voice over
many falls.
'Where  in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered:  'We
