whispering darkness behind. 'Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the
Accursed Years! Speed only we ask.  Let us pass, and then come! I summon
you
to the Stone of Erech!'
There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than
the whispers  before;  and  then  a chill  blast came in  which  the torches
flickered and  went  out,  and could not be  rekindled.  Of  the  time  that
followed, one hour  or many, Gimli remembered little. The others pressed on,
but  he  was ever hindmost, pursued  by a groping horror that  seemed always
just  about to seize  him; and a rumour came after him like the shadow-sound
of many feet. He  stumbled  on until he  was  crawling  like a beast on  the
ground and felt that he could endure no more: he  must either find an ending
and escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear.
Suddenly he  heard the  tinkle of water, a sound hard and  clear  as  a
stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light  grew, and lo! the  company
passed  through another  gateway, high-arched and broad, and a rill  ran out
beside  them;  and  beyond, going  steeply  down, was  a road between  sheer
cliffs, knife-edged against the sky  far above.  So deep and narrow was that
chasm  that  the sky was  dark, and in it small stars  glinted. Yet as Gimli
after learned it was still two hours ere sunset of the day on which they had
set out from Dunharrow; though for all that he could then tell it might have
been twilight in some later year, or in some other world.
The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They
rode
in  file, and evening came on and a  deep blue  dusk; and still fear pursued
them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before
his face  the glitter in the Elf's  bright  eyes. Behind them rode  Elladan,
last of the Company, but not the last of those that took the downward road.
'The  Dead are following,'  said Legolas. 'I  see shapes  of Men and of
horses,  and  pale  banners  like   shreds   of   cloud,  and   spears  like
winter-thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.'
'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,' said Elladan.
The Company  came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as it they had
issued  from  a crack in a wall; and there  lay the uplands  of a great vale
before them,  and the stream  beside them went down with a  cold  voice over
many falls.
'Where  in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered:  'We
have descended  from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that
flows at last to the sea that washes the  walls of Dol Amroth. You  will not
need to ask hereafter how comes its name: Blackroot men call it.'
The  Morthond Vale made a  great  bay that beat up  against  the  sheer
southern faces of the  mountains. Its steep slopes were grass-grown; but all
was grey in that  hour, for the sun had gone, and  far below lights twinkled
in the homes of Men. The vale was rich and many folk dwelt there.
Then without  turning  Aragorn  cried aloud so  that  all  could  hear:
'Friends, forget your weariness! Ride now, ride!  We  must come to the Stone
of Erech ere this day passes, and long still is the way.' So without looking
back they rode  the mountain-fields, until they came to  a  bridge over  the
growing torrent and found a road that went down into the land.
Lights went out in house and hamlet as they came, and doors  were shut,
and folk that were  afield cried in terror and ran  wild  like  hunted deer.
Ever there rose the same cry in the gathering  night: 'The King of the Dead!
The King of the Dead is come upon us!'
Bells  were ringing far  below, and all men  fled  before  the face  of
Aragorn; but the Grey  Company in their haste rode like hunters, until their
horses were stumbling  with weariness. And thus, just ere midnight, and in a
darkness  as black as the caverns in the mountains, they came at last to the
Hill of Erech.
Long had the terror of  the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty
fields about it. For upon  the  top stood  a  black stone, round  as a great
globe,  the  height  of a man, though its  half  was buried  in the  ground.
Unearthly it looked, as though it had fallen from the sky, as some believed;
but those who remembered still the lore of Westernesse told that it had been
brought out of the ruin of N®menor and there  set by Isildur at his landing.
None of the people of the valley dared to approach it, nor would  they dwell
near;  for  they said  that it was a trysting-place  of  the Shadow-men, and
there  they would  gather in  times  of fear, thronging round  the Stone and
whispering.
To that Stone  the Company came and halted in the  dead  of night. Then
Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and  it seemed to
those that stood near  that they heard a sound of answering  horns, as if it
was  an echo in deep caves far away. No other sound they heard, and yet they
were aware of a great host gathered  all about the hill on which they stood;
and a chill wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains. But
Aragorn dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice:
'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?'
And a voice  was heard  out of the  night that answered him, as if from
far away:
'To fulfil our oath and have peace.'
Then Aragorn said: 'The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon
Anduin, and ye shall come after  me. And when all this land is clean  of the
servants  of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace
and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.'
And with that he  bade Halbarad unfurl  the great standard which he had
brought; and behold! it was black, and if  there was any device upon  it, it
was hidden in the darkness. Then there was silence, and  not a whisper nor a
sigh  was heard  again all the long  night.  The  Company camped  beside the
Stone,  but  they slept little, because  of the dread  of  the Shadows  that
hedged them round.
But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led
the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and  weariness that any
among them  had known, save he  alone, and only his will held them to go on.
No  other mortal Men  could  have endured it, none but the  D®nedain  of the
North, and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.
They  passed Tarlang's Neck and came  into Lamedon; and the Shadow
Host
pressed behind and  fear went on  before them,  until they  came to Calembel
upon Ciril,  and the sun  went down like  blood behind Pinnath Gelin away in
the West  behind them.  The township  and  the  fords  of  Ciril  they found
deserted,  for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to
the hills at the  rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next
day there  came no dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness
of
the Storm  of  Mordor and were lost  to  mortal sight; but the Dead followed
them.
