Aragorn dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice:
'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?'
And a voice  was heard  out of the  night that answered him, as if from
far away:
'To fulfil our oath and have peace.'
Then Aragorn said: 'The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon
Anduin, and ye shall come after  me. And when all this land is clean  of the
servants  of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace
and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.'
And with that he  bade Halbarad unfurl  the great standard which he had
brought; and behold! it was black, and if  there was any device upon  it, it
was hidden in the darkness. Then there was silence, and  not a whisper nor a
sigh  was heard  again all the long  night.  The  Company camped  beside the
Stone,  but  they slept little, because  of the dread  of  the Shadows  that
hedged them round.
But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led
the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and  weariness that any
among them  had known, save he  alone, and only his will held them to go on.
No  other mortal Men  could  have endured it, none but the  D®nedain  of the
North, and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.
They  passed Tarlang's Neck and came  into Lamedon; and the Shadow
Host
pressed behind and  fear went on  before them,  until they  came to Calembel
upon Ciril,  and the sun  went down like  blood behind Pinnath Gelin away in
the West  behind them.  The township  and  the  fords  of  Ciril  they found
deserted,  for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to
the hills at the  rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next
day there  came no dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness
of
the Storm  of  Mordor and were lost  to  mortal sight; but the Dead followed
them.
Chapter 3. The Muster of Rohan
Now all roads were running together to  the  East to meet the coming of
war and the onset of the Shadow. And even as Pippin  stood at the Great Gate
of the City  and saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride in with  his banners, the
King of Rohan came down out of the hills.
Day  was waning. In  the last  rays  of the  sun  the Riders  cast long
pointed shadows that went on before them. Darkness had already crept beneath
the murmuring fir-woods that clothed the steep mountain-sides. The king rode
now  slowly at the end  of  the day. Presently the  path turned round a huge
bare  shoulder of rock and plunged into the  gloom  of  soft-sighing  trees.
Down, down they went in a long winding file. When  at last they came  to the
bottom of  the gorge they  found that evening had fallen in the deep places.
The sun was gone. Twilight lay upon the waterfalls.
All day far below them a leaping stream had run down from the high pass
behind, cleaving its narrow way between pine-clad  walls; and now  through a
stony  gate it flowed out and passed into a wider vale. The Riders  followed
it, and suddenly Harrowdale lay before  them, loud with  the noise of waters
in the evening. There the white Snowbourn, joined by the lesser stream, went
rushing, fuming on  the  stones,  down to Edoras and the green hills and the
plains. Away to the right at the head of the great dale the mighty Starkhorn
loomed up above its  vast buttresses swathed in cloud; but  its jagged peak,
clothed in everlasting snow, gleamed far above the world, blue-shadowed upon
the East, red-stained by the sunset in the West.
Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange country,  of which he  had
heard many tales upon their long road.  It was a skyless world, in which his
eye; through dim gulfs of shadowy  air, saw only ever-mounting slopes, great
walls of  stone behind  great  walls, and  frowning precipices wreathed with
mist.  He sat  for a moment half dreaming, listening to  the noise of water,
the  whisper of dark trees, the crack of stone, and the vast waiting silence
that brooded  behind all sound. He  loved  mountains,  or he had  loved  the
thought of them marching  on the edge of stories brought from far away;  but
now he was borne down by the insupportable weight of Middle-earth. He
longed
to shut out the immensity in a quiet room by a fire.
He was very tired, for though they had  ridden slowly, they had  ridden
with very  little  rest. Hour after  hour for nearly three weary days he had
jogged  up  and down, over passes, and through long dales,  and  across many
streams. Sometimes where the way  was  broader he  had ridden at  the king's
side, not noticing that many  of the Riders smiled to see  the two together:
the  hobbit  on his little shaggy grey pony,  and the Lord of  Rohan on  his
great white horse. Then he had talked to Thjoden, telling him about his home
and the doings of  the Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark
and its  mighty  men of old.  But most of the time, especially  on this last
day, Merry had ridden  by himself just behind the  king, saying nothing, and
trying to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the men
behind him using. It was  a  language in which there seemed to be many words
that he  knew, though spoken more richly and strongly than in the Shire, yet
he could not piece the words together. At times some Rider would lift up his
clear voice in stirring song,  and Merry felt his heart leap, though he  did
not know what it was about.
All the  same  he had been lonely, and  never more so  than now at  the
day's end.  He wondered where  in all this strange world  Pippin had got to;
and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and Gimli. Then suddenly
like a
cold touch on his heart he thought of Frodo and Sam. 'I am forgetting them!'
he said  to himself reproachfully. 'And yet they are more important than all
the  rest of us. And I  came to help them; but now  they must be hundreds of
miles away, if they are still alive.' He shivered.
'Harrowdale at  last!' said Jomer. 'Our journey  is almost at  an end.'
They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply. Only a glimpse,
as  through a tall window, could be seen of the great valley in the gloaming
below. A single small light could be seen twinkling by the river.
'This journey is over, maybe,' said Thjoden, 'but I have far yet to go.
Last night the  moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras  to
the gathering of the Mark.'
'But if you would take my  counsel,'  said  Jomer  in a low voice, 'you
would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.'
Thjoden smiled.  'Nay,  my son, for  so I will call you, speak  not the
soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!' He drew himself up and looked
back
at the long line of his men fading into the dusk behind. 'Long years  in the
space of days it seems since I rode west;  but never  will I lean on a staff
