with very  little  rest. Hour after  hour for nearly three weary days he had
jogged  up  and down, over passes, and through long dales,  and  across many
streams. Sometimes where the way  was  broader he  had ridden at  the king's
side, not noticing that many  of the Riders smiled to see  the two together:
the  hobbit  on his little shaggy grey pony,  and the Lord of  Rohan on  his
great white horse. Then he had talked to Thjoden, telling him about his home
and the doings of  the Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark
and its  mighty  men of old.  But most of the time, especially  on this last
day, Merry had ridden  by himself just behind the  king, saying nothing, and
trying to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the men
behind him using. It was  a  language in which there seemed to be many words
that he  knew, though spoken more richly and strongly than in the Shire, yet
he could not piece the words together. At times some Rider would lift up his
clear voice in stirring song,  and Merry felt his heart leap, though he  did
not know what it was about.
All the  same  he had been lonely, and  never more so  than now at  the
day's end.  He wondered where  in all this strange world  Pippin had got to;
and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and Gimli. Then suddenly
like a
cold touch on his heart he thought of Frodo and Sam. 'I am forgetting them!'
he said  to himself reproachfully. 'And yet they are more important than all
the  rest of us. And I  came to help them; but now  they must be hundreds of
miles away, if they are still alive.' He shivered.
'Harrowdale at  last!' said Jomer. 'Our journey  is almost at  an end.'
They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply. Only a glimpse,
as  through a tall window, could be seen of the great valley in the gloaming
below. A single small light could be seen twinkling by the river.
'This journey is over, maybe,' said Thjoden, 'but I have far yet to go.
Last night the  moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras  to
the gathering of the Mark.'
'But if you would take my  counsel,'  said  Jomer  in a low voice, 'you
would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.'
Thjoden smiled.  'Nay,  my son, for  so I will call you, speak  not the
soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!' He drew himself up and looked
back
at the long line of his men fading into the dusk behind. 'Long years  in the
space of days it seems since I rode west;  but never  will I lean on a staff
again. If the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills? And  if
it is won, what grief will it be, even if I fall, spending my last strength?
But we will leave this now. Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One
evening of peace at least is left us. Let us ride on!'
In  the  deepening  dusk  they came  down  into  the  valley. Here  the
Snowbourn flowed near  to the western walls of  the dale, and soon the  path
led them to a ford where the shallow  waters murmured  loudly on the stones.
The ford was guarded.  As the king approached many men sprang up out of  the
shadow of the rocks; and when they saw the king they cried with glad voices:
'Thjoden King! Thjoden King! The King of the Mark returns!'
Then one blew a long call on  a horn.  It  echoed in the  valley. Other
horns answered it, and lights shone out across the river.
And suddenly  there  rose a great chorus of  trumpets from high  above,
sounding from some hollow  place, as  it seemed, that gathered  their  notes
into one voice and sent it rolling and beating on the walls of stone.
So the  King  of  the Mark came back  victorious  out  of the  West  to
Dunharrow  beneath  the feet  of  the White  Mountains. There he  found  the
remaining  strength  of  his people  already assembled; for as soon  as  his
coming was known captains rode to  meet  him at  the ford,  bearing messages
from Gandalf. D®nhere,  chieftain of  the  folk of Harrowdale, was at  their
head.
'At dawn three  days ago,  lord,' he  said. 'Shadowfax came like a wind
out of  the West to  Edoras, and Gandalf brought  tidings of your victory to
gladden  our  hearts.  But  he  brought also  word from you  to  hasten  the
gathering of the Riders. And then came the winged Shadow.'
'The winged Shadow?' said Thjoden. 'We saw it also, but that was in the
dead of night before Gandalf left us.'
'Maybe, lord,' said D®nhere. 'Yet the same, or  another like to  it,  a
flying darkness in  the shape of a  monstrous bird, passed  over Edoras that
morning, and all men were  shaken with fear. For it  stooped  upon Meduseld,
and  as it came low, almost to the gable,  there came a cry that stopped our
hearts.  Then  it was that  Gandalf  counselled  us  not to  assemble in the
fields, but to meet you here in the valley under the mountains. And  he bade
us to kindle no more lights or fires than  barest need asked. So it has been
done. Gandalf spoke with great authority. We trust that it is as  you  would
wish. Naught has been seen in Harrowdale of these evil things.'
'It is well,' said Thjoden. 'I  will ride  now  to  the Hold, and there
before  I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to
me as soon as may be!'
The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at that
point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of rough grass,
grey now in the falling night,  lay all about, but  in front on the far side
of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier of the great  roots of
the Starkhorn, cloven by the river in ages past.
On all the level spaces there was great concourse of men. Some thronged
to the  roadside, hailing  the king and the riders  from the West with  glad
cries; but stretching away into the distance behind there  were ordered rows
of tents and booths, and lines of picketed horses,  and great store of arms,
and piled spears bristling like  thickets of new-planted trees. Now  all the
great assembly was falling into shadow, and yet, though the night-chill blew
cold  from  the heights  no  lanterns  glowed, no fires  were  lit. Watchmen
heavily cloaked paced to and fro.
Merry wondered  how many Riders there  were. He  could  not guess their
number in the gathering gloom, but it  looked to him like a great army, many
thousands strong. While  he was  peering from side  to side the king's party
came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there
suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in  amazement.  He
was
on a road the like of which he had never seen before,  a great work of men's
hands in years beyond the  reach of  song. Upwards it wound, coiling  like a
snake, boring its way across the  sheer slope of rock.  Steep as a stair, it
looped  backwards and forwards as it  climbed. Up it horses  could walk, and
wains  could be slowly hauled; but no  enemy could come that way, except out
of the air,  if it was defended from above. At each turn  of the road  there
were great standing stones that had been carved in the likeness of men, huge
and clumsy-limbed, squatting cross-legged  with  their stumpy arms folded on
fat bellies. Some in the wearing of the years had lost all features save the
dark  holes of  their eyes that  still stared  sadly  at the passers-by. The
Riders hardly glanced at them.  The  P®kel-men they  called them, and heeded
them little:  no power or terror was left in them; but  Merry  gazed at them
with wonder  and a feeling almost of pity,  as they loomed up  mournfully in
the dusk.
After a while he looked back and found that he had already climbed some
hundreds of feet  above the valley, but still far below he could dimly see a
