before  I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to
me as soon as may be!'
The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at that
point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of rough grass,
grey now in the falling night,  lay all about, but  in front on the far side
of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier of the great  roots of
the Starkhorn, cloven by the river in ages past.
On all the level spaces there was great concourse of men. Some thronged
to the  roadside, hailing  the king and the riders  from the West with  glad
cries; but stretching away into the distance behind there  were ordered rows
of tents and booths, and lines of picketed horses,  and great store of arms,
and piled spears bristling like  thickets of new-planted trees. Now  all the
great assembly was falling into shadow, and yet, though the night-chill blew
cold  from  the heights  no  lanterns  glowed, no fires  were  lit. Watchmen
heavily cloaked paced to and fro.
Merry wondered  how many Riders there  were. He  could  not guess their
number in the gathering gloom, but it  looked to him like a great army, many
thousands strong. While  he was  peering from side  to side the king's party
came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there
suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in  amazement.  He
was
on a road the like of which he had never seen before,  a great work of men's
hands in years beyond the  reach of  song. Upwards it wound, coiling  like a
snake, boring its way across the  sheer slope of rock.  Steep as a stair, it
looped  backwards and forwards as it  climbed. Up it horses  could walk, and
wains  could be slowly hauled; but no  enemy could come that way, except out
of the air,  if it was defended from above. At each turn  of the road  there
were great standing stones that had been carved in the likeness of men, huge
and clumsy-limbed, squatting cross-legged  with  their stumpy arms folded on
fat bellies. Some in the wearing of the years had lost all features save the
dark  holes of  their eyes that  still stared  sadly  at the passers-by. The
Riders hardly glanced at them.  The  P®kel-men they  called them, and heeded
them little:  no power or terror was left in them; but  Merry  gazed at them
with wonder  and a feeling almost of pity,  as they loomed up  mournfully in
the dusk.
After a while he looked back and found that he had already climbed some
hundreds of feet  above the valley, but still far below he could dimly see a
winding  line of Riders crossing the ford and filing along the  road towards
the camp prepared for  them. Only the king  and his guard were going up into
the Hold.
At last the king's company came to a sharp brink, and the climbing road
passed into a cutting between walls of rock, and  so went  up a  short slope
and  out  on  to a  wide  upland.  The  Firienfeld  men called it,  a  green
mountain-field of grass and heath, high above the deep-delved courses of the
Snowbourn,  laid upon the lap of the great mountains  behind:  the Starkhorn
southwards, and northwards the saw-toothed mass of  Irensaga, between  which
there faced the riders, the  grim black wall  of the Dwimorberg, the Haunted
Mountain rising out of  steep slopes of  sombre  pines. Dividing the  upland
into  two  there  marched  a double  line of unshaped standing  stones  that
dwindled into the dusk and vanished in the  trees. Those who dared to follow
that road came soon to the black Dimholt under Dwimorberg, and the menace
of
the pillar of stone, and the yawning shadow of the forbidden door.
Such was the dark Dunharrow, the work of long-forgotten men. Their name
was lost and no song or legend remembered it. For what purpose they had
made
this place,  as a town  or secret temple or a tomb of kings, none could say.
Here they laboured in the Dark Years, before ever a ship came to the western
shores, or Gondor of the D®nedain was built; and now  they had vanished, and
only the old P®kel-men were left, still sitting at the turnings of the road.
Merry stared at the lines of marching stones: they were worn and black;
some  were  leaning, some were  fallen,  some cracked or broken; they looked
like  rows  of old  and hungry teeth. He wondered what they could be, and he
hoped  that the king was not going to follow  them into the darkness beyond.
Then  he saw that there were  clusters of tents and booths on either side of
the stony way; but these were not set near the  trees, and seemed rather  to
huddle  away  from them towards the  brink of the  cliff. The greater number
were on the right, where the Firienfeld was wider; and on the left there was
a smaller camp, in the midst of which stood a  tall pavilion. From this side
a rider now came out to meet them, and they turned from the road.
As  they drew near  Merry  saw  that  the rider was a  woman  with long
braided hair gleaming  in the twilight,  yet she wore a helm and was clad to
the waist like a warrior and girded with a sword.
'Hail,  Lord of  the  Mark!'  she  cried. 'My  heart  is  glad  at your
returning.'
'And you, Jowyn,' said Thjoden, 'is all well with you?'
'All  is well,' she  answered; yet it  seemed to  Merry  that her voice
belied her,  and he would have  thought that she had  been weeping, if  that
could be believed of one so stern of face. 'All is well. It was a weary road
for  the people to  take,  torn suddenly  from their homes.  There were hard
words, for it is long since war  has driven  us from  the green fields;  but
there have been no evil deeds.  All  is now ordered, as  you  see. And  your
lodging is prepared for you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the
hour of your coming.'
'So Aragorn has come then,' said Jomer. 'Is he still here?'
'No, he is gone,' said Jowyn turning away and  looking at the mountains
dark against the East and South.
'Whither did he go?' asked Jomer.
'I  do not  know,'  she answered.  'He  came at  night,  and rode  away
yestermorn, ere the Sun had climbed over the mountain-tops. He is gone.'
'You are grieved, daughter,' said Thjoden. 'What has happened? Tell me,
did  he speak  of  that road?' He pointed  away along the darkening lines of
stones towards the Dwimorberg. 'Of the Paths of the Dead?'
'Yes, lord,' said Jowyn. 'And he has passed into the shadows from which
none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.'
'Then our paths are sundered,' said  Jomer. 'He is  lost.  We must ride
without him, and our hope dwindles.'
Slowly they  passed through the short heath and  upland grass, speaking
no  more, until they  came to the king's pavilion.  There  Merry  found that
everything  was made ready, and that he himself was not forgotten. A  little
tent had been pitched for  him beside the king's  lodging; and there he  sat
alone,  while men passed to and fro, going in to the king and taking counsel
with him. Night came on, and the half-seen heads of  the mountains  westward
were  crowned  with  stars, but the East was dark  and  blank.  The marching
stones  faded slowly  from sight,  but still beyond them,  blacker than  the
gloom, brooded the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg.
'The  Paths  of the Dead,'  he muttered to himself. 'The  Paths  of the
Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They have all gone
to some doom:  Gandalf and Pippin to  war in the East; and  Sam and Frodo to
Mordor; and  Strider and  Legolas and Gimli to the Paths of the Dead. But my
turn will come  soon enough, I suppose. I  wonder what they are all  talking
