returning.'
'And you, Jowyn,' said Thjoden, 'is all well with you?'
'All  is well,' she  answered; yet it  seemed to  Merry  that her voice
belied her,  and he would have  thought that she had  been weeping, if  that
could be believed of one so stern of face. 'All is well. It was a weary road
for  the people to  take,  torn suddenly  from their homes.  There were hard
words, for it is long since war  has driven  us from  the green fields;  but
there have been no evil deeds.  All  is now ordered, as  you  see. And  your
lodging is prepared for you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the
hour of your coming.'
'So Aragorn has come then,' said Jomer. 'Is he still here?'
'No, he is gone,' said Jowyn turning away and  looking at the mountains
dark against the East and South.
'Whither did he go?' asked Jomer.
'I  do not  know,'  she answered.  'He  came at  night,  and rode  away
yestermorn, ere the Sun had climbed over the mountain-tops. He is gone.'
'You are grieved, daughter,' said Thjoden. 'What has happened? Tell me,
did  he speak  of  that road?' He pointed  away along the darkening lines of
stones towards the Dwimorberg. 'Of the Paths of the Dead?'
'Yes, lord,' said Jowyn. 'And he has passed into the shadows from which
none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.'
'Then our paths are sundered,' said  Jomer. 'He is  lost.  We must ride
without him, and our hope dwindles.'
Slowly they  passed through the short heath and  upland grass, speaking
no  more, until they  came to the king's pavilion.  There  Merry  found that
everything  was made ready, and that he himself was not forgotten. A  little
tent had been pitched for  him beside the king's  lodging; and there he  sat
alone,  while men passed to and fro, going in to the king and taking counsel
with him. Night came on, and the half-seen heads of  the mountains  westward
were  crowned  with  stars, but the East was dark  and  blank.  The marching
stones  faded slowly  from sight,  but still beyond them,  blacker than  the
gloom, brooded the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg.
'The  Paths  of the Dead,'  he muttered to himself. 'The  Paths  of the
Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They have all gone
to some doom:  Gandalf and Pippin to  war in the East; and  Sam and Frodo to
Mordor; and  Strider and  Legolas and Gimli to the Paths of the Dead. But my
turn will come  soon enough, I suppose. I  wonder what they are all  talking
about, and what the king means to do. For I must go where he goes now.'
In the midst of these  gloomy  thoughts  he suddenly remembered that he
was very hungry, and he got  up to go and see if anyone else in this strange
camp felt the  same.  But at  that very moment a trumpet sounded, and  a man
came summoning him, the king's esquire, to wait at the king's board.
In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off with
broidered  hangings, and strewn  with skins:  and there at a small table sat
Thjoden with Jomer and Jowyn, and D®nhere,  lord of  Harrowdale. Merry
stood
beside the king's stool and waited on him till presently the old man, coming
out of deep thought, turned to him and smiled.
'Come, Master Meriadoc!'  he said. 'You shall  not stand. You shall sit
beside me, as long  as I remain  in my own lands, and lighten my heart  with
tales.'
Room was made for the hobbit at the king's left hand, but no one called
for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and drank for the
most  part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage,  Merry  asked the
question that was tormenting him.
'Twice  now, lord, I have heard  of the  Paths of the  Dead,' he  said.
'What are  they? And where has Strider, I mean the Lord Aragorn where has he
gone?'
The king sighed, but no one answered, until at last Jomer spoke. 'We do
not know, and our hearts are heavy,' he  said. 'But as  for the Paths of the
Dead, you have yourself walked on their  first steps. Nay. I speak no  words
of  ill  omen! The road that  we have  climbed is  the approach to the Door,
yonder in the Dimholt. But what lies beyond no man knows.'
'No man knows,' said  Thjoden:  'yet ancient legend, now seldom spoken,
has  somewhat to  report. If these old  tales speak true that have come down
from father to son in the House  of  Eorl, then  the  Door  under Dwimorberg
leads to a  secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some forgotten end.
But none  have ever  ventured in to search its secrets, since Baldor, son of
Brego, passed the  Door  and was  never seen among men again. A rash  vow
he
spoke,  as he drained  the  horn  at that feast which  Brego made  to hallow
new-built Meduseld,  and he came never to the  high seat of which he was the
heir.
'Folk say that Dead Men  out of the Dark Years guard  the way  and will
suffer no living man to come to their  hidden halls;  but at whiles they may
themselves  be seen passing out of the door like shadows and down  the stony
road. Then the people of Harrowdale  shut fast  their doors and shroud their
windows and are afraid. But the Dead come seldom forth and only  at times of
great unquiet and coming death.'
'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,' said Jowyn in a low voice. 'that in the
moonless nights but little  while ago  a great host in  strange array passed
by. Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and
vanished
into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.'
'Then why  has Aragorn  gone that  way?'  asked Merry. 'Don't you  know
anything that would explain it?'
'Unless  he has  spoken  words  to  you as his friend that we  have not
heard,'  said  Jomer,  'none now  in  the land of the  living  can tell  his
purpose.'
'Greatly  changed he seemed to  me since I saw him first  in the king's
house,' said Jowyn: 'grimmer, older.  Fey I thought  him, and  like one whom
the Dead call.'
'Maybe  he was called,' said  Thjoden;  'and my  heart  tells me that I
shall  not see him again.  Yet he is a kingly man of high  destiny. And take
comfort in this,  daughter, since comfort you seem to need in your grief for
this guest.  It is said  that  when the Eorlingas  came out of the North and
passed  at length up the  Snowbourn, seeking strong places of refuge in time
of need, Brego and his son Baldor climbed the Stair of the  Hold and so came
before  the Door.  On  the threshold sat an  old man, aged beyond  guess  of
years; tall and kingly he had been, but now he was withered as an old stone.
Indeed for stone they took him, for he moved not, and he said no word, until
they sought to pass him  by and enter. And then a  voice came out of him, as
it were out  of  the ground,  and  to  their amaze  it spoke in  the western
tongue:    The way is shut    .
'Then they halted and looked at him and saw that he lived still; but he
did not  look at them.       The way is shut     , his voice said again     It was made by
those who  are Dead,  and the Dead keep it, until the time comes. The way is
shut.
' And  when  will that time be?       said Baldor. But  no answer  did he ever
get. For the old man died in that hour  and fell upon his face; and no other
tidings of the ancient dwellers in the mountains have our folk ever learned.
