suffer no living man to come to their  hidden halls;  but at whiles they may
themselves  be seen passing out of the door like shadows and down  the stony
road. Then the people of Harrowdale  shut fast  their doors and shroud their
windows and are afraid. But the Dead come seldom forth and only  at times of
great unquiet and coming death.'
'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,' said Jowyn in a low voice. 'that in the
moonless nights but little  while ago  a great host in  strange array passed
by. Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and
vanished
into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.'
'Then why  has Aragorn  gone that  way?'  asked Merry. 'Don't you  know
anything that would explain it?'
'Unless  he has  spoken  words  to  you as his friend that we  have not
heard,'  said  Jomer,  'none now  in  the land of the  living  can tell  his
purpose.'
'Greatly  changed he seemed to  me since I saw him first  in the king's
house,' said Jowyn: 'grimmer, older.  Fey I thought  him, and  like one whom
the Dead call.'
'Maybe  he was called,' said  Thjoden;  'and my  heart  tells me that I
shall  not see him again.  Yet he is a kingly man of high  destiny. And take
comfort in this,  daughter, since comfort you seem to need in your grief for
this guest.  It is said  that  when the Eorlingas  came out of the North and
passed  at length up the  Snowbourn, seeking strong places of refuge in time
of need, Brego and his son Baldor climbed the Stair of the  Hold and so came
before  the Door.  On  the threshold sat an  old man, aged beyond  guess  of
years; tall and kingly he had been, but now he was withered as an old stone.
Indeed for stone they took him, for he moved not, and he said no word, until
they sought to pass him  by and enter. And then a  voice came out of him, as
it were out  of  the ground,  and  to  their amaze  it spoke in  the western
tongue:    The way is shut    .
'Then they halted and looked at him and saw that he lived still; but he
did not  look at them.       The way is shut     , his voice said again     It was made by
those who  are Dead,  and the Dead keep it, until the time comes. The way is
shut.
' And  when  will that time be?       said Baldor. But  no answer  did he ever
get. For the old man died in that hour  and fell upon his face; and no other
tidings of the ancient dwellers in the mountains have our folk ever learned.
Yet maybe at last the time foretold has come, and Aragorn may pass.'
'But how  shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by
daring the Door?' said  Jomer. 'And that way  I would not go  though all the
hosts of Mordor stood before me, and  I were alone and had no other  refuge.
Alas that a fey mood should  fall  on a  man so greathearted in this hour of
need! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking them under the
earth? War is at hand.'
He  paused, for at that moment there was a noise outside, a man's voice
crying the name of Thjoden, and the challenge of the guard.
Presently the captain of the Guard thrust aside the curtain. 'A  man is
here, lord,' he  said, 'an errand-rider of Gondor. He wishes to come  before
you at once.'
'Let him come!' said Thjoden.
A tall man entered, and Merry choked back a cry; for a moment it seemed
to him that Boromir was alive  again and  had returned. Then he saw  that it
was not so; the man was a stranger, though as like  to Boromir as if he were
one of his kin, tall and grey-eyed  and proud. He was clad as a rider with a
cloak of  dark  green over a coat of fine mail; on the front of his helm was
wrought  a  small  silver  star.  In  his  hand  he  bore  a  single  arrow,
black-feathered and barbed with steel, but the point was painted red.
He sank on one knee and  presented the  arrow to Thjoden. 'Hail Lord of
the  Rohirrim, friend  of Gondor!' he said.  'Hirgon I  am,  errand-rider of
Denethor,  who bring you this token  of  war. Gondor is in great need. Often
the Rohirrim have  aided us,  but now the  Lord  Denethor asks for  all your
strength and all your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.'
'The  Red  Arrow!' said  Thjoden, holding  it, as  one  who receives  a
summons  long expected and  yet  dreadful  when it comes. His hand trembled.
'The Red  Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years! Has it indeed
come  to that? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that  all  my strength
and all my speed may be?'
'That is best known  to yourself,  lord,' said Hirgon. 'But ere long it
may  well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded,  and unless you have
the strength to  break a siege of many powers, the Lord Denethor bids me say
that he judges that the  strong arms of the Rohirrim would  be better within
his walls than without.'
'But he knows that we are a people  who fight rather upon horseback and
in  the open, and that we are also a scattered people and time is needed for
the gathering of our Riders.  Is it not true, Hirgon, that the Lord of Minas
Tirith knows more than he sets in his message? For we are already at war, as
you may have seen, and you do not find us all  unprepared. Gandalf the  Grey
has been among us, and even now we are mustering for battle in the East.'
'What  the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot
say,' answered Hirgon. 'But indeed our  case is desperate. My  lord does not
issue any command  to  you, he begs  you only to remember old friendship and
oaths  long spoken, and  for your  own  good to do  all that you may. It  is
reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the  East  to the service
of Mordor. From the  North to  the field  of Dagorlad there is skirmish  and
rumour of war. In the  South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on
all our  coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste!
For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be
decided,  and if the tide be not stemmed there, then  it will flow  over all
the fair fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills  there shall
be no refuge.'
'Dark  tidings,'  said Thjoden,  'yet  not  all  unguessed. But say  to
Denethor that even if Rohan itself felt no peril, still we would come to his
aid. But we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman the traitor,
and we must  still  think of our frontier to the  north and east, as his own
tidings make  clear.  So great a power as the  Dark Lord seems  now to wield
might well  contain us in  battle before the City and yet  strike with great
force across the River away beyond the Gate of Kings.
'But  we  will  speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come. The
weapontake was set for the morrow.  When all is ordered we will set out. Ten
thousand spears I might  have sent  riding over  the plain to the dismay  of
your foes. It will be less  now, I fear; for I will not leave my strongholds
all unguarded. Yet six thousands at the  least shall ride behind me. For say
to Denethor that in this hour the King of the Mark himself will come down to
the land  of Gondor, though  maybe  he will not ride back. But it is a  long
road, and man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight. A week it
may be from tomorrow's morn  ere you hear the cry of the Sons of Eorl coming
from the North.
'A week!' said Hirgon. 'If it must be so, it must. But you are like  to
find  only  ruined  walls  in  seven  days  from  now,   unless  other  help
unlooked-for comes. Still, you may at the least disturb the Orcs and Swarthy
Men from their feasting in the White Tower.'
