the gathering of our Riders.  Is it not true, Hirgon, that the Lord of Minas
Tirith knows more than he sets in his message? For we are already at war, as
you may have seen, and you do not find us all  unprepared. Gandalf the  Grey
has been among us, and even now we are mustering for battle in the East.'
'What  the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot
say,' answered Hirgon. 'But indeed our  case is desperate. My  lord does not
issue any command  to  you, he begs  you only to remember old friendship and
oaths  long spoken, and  for your  own  good to do  all that you may. It  is
reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the  East  to the service
of Mordor. From the  North to  the field  of Dagorlad there is skirmish  and
rumour of war. In the  South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on
all our  coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste!
For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be
decided,  and if the tide be not stemmed there, then  it will flow  over all
the fair fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills  there shall
be no refuge.'
'Dark  tidings,'  said Thjoden,  'yet  not  all  unguessed. But say  to
Denethor that even if Rohan itself felt no peril, still we would come to his
aid. But we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman the traitor,
and we must  still  think of our frontier to the  north and east, as his own
tidings make  clear.  So great a power as the  Dark Lord seems  now to wield
might well  contain us in  battle before the City and yet  strike with great
force across the River away beyond the Gate of Kings.
'But  we  will  speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come. The
weapontake was set for the morrow.  When all is ordered we will set out. Ten
thousand spears I might  have sent  riding over  the plain to the dismay  of
your foes. It will be less  now, I fear; for I will not leave my strongholds
all unguarded. Yet six thousands at the  least shall ride behind me. For say
to Denethor that in this hour the King of the Mark himself will come down to
the land  of Gondor, though  maybe  he will not ride back. But it is a  long
road, and man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight. A week it
may be from tomorrow's morn  ere you hear the cry of the Sons of Eorl coming
from the North.
'A week!' said Hirgon. 'If it must be so, it must. But you are like  to
find  only  ruined  walls  in  seven  days  from  now,   unless  other  help
unlooked-for comes. Still, you may at the least disturb the Orcs and Swarthy
Men from their feasting in the White Tower.'
'At the least we will do that,' said Thjoden. 'But I myself am new-come
from  battle and long  journey, and I will  now go to rest. Tarry here  this
night. Then you shall  look on the muster of Rohan and ride away the gladder
for  the sight, and the swifter for the  rest.  In the morning counsels  are
best, and night changes many thoughts.
With  that the king stood up, and they all rose.  'Go  now each to your
rest.'  he said, 'and  sleep well. And you, Master Meriadoc, I  need no more
tonight. But be ready to my call as soon as the Sun is risen.'
'I will be ready,' said Merry, 'even if you bid me ride with you on the
Paths of the Dead.'
'Speak not words  of omen!' said the king. 'For there may be more roads
than one that could  bear  that name. But I did not say that I would bid you
ride with me on any road. Good night!'
'I won't be left behind,  to be called for on return!'  said  Merry. 'I
won't be  left, I won't.' And repeating this over and  over again to himself
he fell asleep at last in his tent.
He  was  wakened by  a  man  shaking him.  'Wake up,  wake  up.  Master
Holbytla!' he cried; and at length Merry came out of  deep dreams and sat up
with a start. It still seemed very dark, he thought.
'What is the matter?' he asked.
'The king calls for you.'
'But the Sun has not risen, yet,' said Merry.
'No, and will not rise  today,  Master Holbytla. Nor  ever  again,  one
would think under this cloud. But time  does not stand still, though the Sun
be lost. Make haste!'
Flinging on some clothes, Merry looked outside. The world was darkling.
The very air seemed brown, and  all things  about were  black  and grey  and
shadowless; there was  a great stillness. No shape  of cloud could be  seen,
unless it were far away  westward, where the furthest groping fingers of the
great gloom  still crawled  onwards  and a little light leaked through them.
Overhead there hung a heavy  roof, sombre and  featureless, and light seemed
rather to be failing than growing.
Merry saw many folk standing, looking up and muttering: all their faces
were grey and sad, and some  were afraid. With a sinking heart  he made  his
way to the king. Hirgon the rider of Gondor was there before him, and beside
him  stood now another man, like  him and  dressed alike,  but  shorter  and
broader. As Merry entered he was speaking to the king.
'It comes from Mordor,  lord,' he said. 'It began last night at sunset.
From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise  and creep across
the sky, and all night as I rode it came behind eating up the stars. Now the
great cloud hangs  over all  the  land between  here  and  the Mountains  of
Shadow; and it is deepening. War has already begun.'
For a while the king sat silent. At last he spoke. 'So we come to it in
the end,' he said: 'the great battle of our time, in which many things shall
pass away. But at least there is no longer need for hiding. We will ride the
straight  way  and  the  open road and with all our  speed. The muster shall
begin  at once, and wait for none that tarry. Have  you good  store in Minas
Tirith? For if we must ride now in all haste, then we must  ride light, with
but meal and water enough to last us into battle.'
'We have very great store long prepared,' answered  Hirgon. Ride now as
light and as swift as you may!'
'Then call  the  heralds,  Jomer,' said  Thjoden. 'Let  the  Riders  be
marshalled!'
Jomer  went out, and presently  the trumpets rang  in the Hold and were
answered by many others from below; but their voices no longer sounded clear
and brave as they had seemed to Merry the night before. Dull they seemed and
harsh in the heavy air, braying ominously.
The  king  turned to Merry. 'I am going  to  war,  Master Meriadoc,' he
said.  'In  a  little while I shall take  the  road.  I release you from  my
service, but not from my friendship.  You shall abide here, and if you will,
you shall serve the Lady Jowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.'
'But, but, lord,' Merry  stammered, 'I offered you my sword.  I do  not
want  to be parted  from you like this, Thjoden King. And as all my  friends
have gone to the battle' I should be ashamed to stay behind.'
'But we ride on horses tall and swift,' said Thjoden; 'and great though
your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.'
'Then tie me on  to the back of one,  or let me hang  on a  stirrup, or
something,' said Merry. 'It  is a long way to  run; but  run  I shall, if  I
cannot ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.'
Thjoden smiled.  'Rather  than  that  I  would  bear  you  with  me  on
Snowmane,'  he said. 'But at the least you shall ride with me to  Edoras and
look on Meduseld;  for that way I  shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the
great race will not begin till we reach the plains.'
Then Jowyn rose  up. 'Come now,  Meriadoc!' she said. 'I will show  you
