'It comes from Mordor,  lord,' he said. 'It began last night at sunset.
From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise  and creep across
the sky, and all night as I rode it came behind eating up the stars. Now the
great cloud hangs  over all  the  land between  here  and  the Mountains  of
Shadow; and it is deepening. War has already begun.'
For a while the king sat silent. At last he spoke. 'So we come to it in
the end,' he said: 'the great battle of our time, in which many things shall
pass away. But at least there is no longer need for hiding. We will ride the
straight  way  and  the  open road and with all our  speed. The muster shall
begin  at once, and wait for none that tarry. Have  you good  store in Minas
Tirith? For if we must ride now in all haste, then we must  ride light, with
but meal and water enough to last us into battle.'
'We have very great store long prepared,' answered  Hirgon. Ride now as
light and as swift as you may!'
'Then call  the  heralds,  Jomer,' said  Thjoden. 'Let  the  Riders  be
marshalled!'
Jomer  went out, and presently  the trumpets rang  in the Hold and were
answered by many others from below; but their voices no longer sounded clear
and brave as they had seemed to Merry the night before. Dull they seemed and
harsh in the heavy air, braying ominously.
The  king  turned to Merry. 'I am going  to  war,  Master Meriadoc,' he
said.  'In  a  little while I shall take  the  road.  I release you from  my
service, but not from my friendship.  You shall abide here, and if you will,
you shall serve the Lady Jowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.'
'But, but, lord,' Merry  stammered, 'I offered you my sword.  I do  not
want  to be parted  from you like this, Thjoden King. And as all my  friends
have gone to the battle' I should be ashamed to stay behind.'
'But we ride on horses tall and swift,' said Thjoden; 'and great though
your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.'
'Then tie me on  to the back of one,  or let me hang  on a  stirrup, or
something,' said Merry. 'It  is a long way to  run; but  run  I shall, if  I
cannot ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.'
Thjoden smiled.  'Rather  than  that  I  would  bear  you  with  me  on
Snowmane,'  he said. 'But at the least you shall ride with me to  Edoras and
look on Meduseld;  for that way I  shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the
great race will not begin till we reach the plains.'
Then Jowyn rose  up. 'Come now,  Meriadoc!' she said. 'I will show  you
the gear that  I have  prepared  fur  you.' They  went out  together.  'This
request only did  Aragorn make to me,' said Jowyn, as  they passed among the
tents, 'that you should be armed for battle. I have  granted it, as I could.
For my heart tells me that you will need such gear ere the end.'
Now she led Merry to a booth among the lodges of the king's  guard  and
there an armourer brought out to her a  small  helm, and a round shield, and
other gear.
'No mail have we to fit you,' said Jowyn, 'nor any time for the forging
of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a belt, and a
knife. A sword you have.'
Merry bowed,  and  the lady showed  him  the shield, which was like the
shield that had  been given  to Gimli, and  it bore on  it the device of the
white horse. 'Take  all  these things,' she  said, 'and  bear  them  to good
fortune! Farewell now, Master  Meriadoc! Yet maybe we  shall meet again, you
and I.'
So  it was that amid a  gathering gloom the King of the Mark made ready
to lead  all  his  Riders on  the eastward road. Hearts were heavy and  many
quailed  in the shadow. But they were  a stern people, loyal to  their lord,
and  little weeping or  murmuring was heard, even in  the  camp in  the Hold
where the exiles from Edoras  were housed, women and children  and old  men.
Doom hung over them, but they faced it silently.
Two  swift hours passed, and now the king  sat  upon  his  white horse,
glimmering in the half light. Proud and tall he seemed, though the hair that
flowed beneath his high helm was  like  snow; and  many marvelled at him and
took heart to see him unbent and unafraid.
There on the wide  flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many
companies well nigh five and fifty  hundreds of Riders fully armed, and many
hundreds of other men  with spare  horses lightly burdened. A single trumpet
sounded. The king raised his  hand, and then silently  the host  of the Mark
began to  move. Foremost went twelve of the king's household-men,  Riders of
renown. Then the king followed with Jomer on his right. He had said farewell
to Jowyn above in  the Hold, and the  memory was grievous; but now he turned
his mind to the  road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry  rode  on Stybba with
the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king's
household. They passed down  the long ranks of  waiting  men with stern  and
unmoved faces.  But when they had  come  almost  to the end of  the line one
looked up  glancing  keenly at the hobbit. A young man,  Merry thought as he
returned the glance, less in height and girth than most. He caught the glint
of clear grey eyes; and then he  shivered, for  it came suddenly to him that
it was the face of one without hope who goes in search of death.
On  down  the grey road they went beside  the  Snowbourn rushing on its
stones; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn, where many sad
faces
of women looked out from dark doors; and so without horn or harp or music of
men's voices the great  ride into the East  began with  which  the songs  of
Rohan were busy for many long lives of men thereafter.
From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning
with thane and captain rode Thengel's son:
to Edoras he came, the ancient halls
of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded;
golden timbers were in gloom mantled.
Farewell he bade to his free people,
hearth and high-seat, and the hallowed places,
where long he had feasted ere the light faded.
Forth rode the king, fear behind him,
fate before him. Fealty kept he;
oaths he had taken, all fulfilled them.
Forth rode Thjoden. Five nights and days
east and onward rode the Eorlingas
through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood,
six thousand spears to Sunlending,
Mundburg the mighty under Mindolluin,
Sea-kings' city in the South-kingdom
foe-beleaguered, fire-encircled.
Doom drove them on. Darkness took them,
Horse and horseman; hoofbeats afar
sank into silence: so the songs tell us.
It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras, although
it  was then but noon by the  hour. There  he halted only  a short while and
strengthened his host by some three  score  of Riders that  came late to the
weapontake. Now having eaten he made ready to set out  again, and  he wished
his esquire  a kindly farewell. But Merry begged for the last time not to be
parted from him.
'This is no journey for  such steeds  as  Stybba,  as I have told you '
