candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot  hustled in and out. One or two
other  hobbits  belonging to the farm-household came in.  In  a short  while
fourteen  sat  down to eat. There  was beer in plenty,  and a mighty dish of
mushrooms  and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The  dogs lay
by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones.
When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern
and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out.
They  threw their  packs  on board  and  climbed in. The farmer sat  in  the
driving-seat,  and whipped up his two stout  ponies. His  wife stood  in the
light of the open door.
'You  be  careful  of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't  go arguing
with any foreigners, and come straight back!'
'I will!' said he, and drove out  of the gate. There was  now no breath
of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air.
They went without  lights and took it  slowly. After  a mile or two the lane
came to an end, crossing a deep dike,  and climbing a short slope up  on  to
the high-banked causeway.
Maggot got down and took a good look  either way, north and  south, but
nothing could  be  seen  in the darkness, and  there was not a sound in  the
still  air.  Thin  strands  of river-mist  were hanging above the dikes, and
crawling over the fields.
'It's going  to be thick,' said Maggot; 'but  I'll not light my lantern
till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet it
tonight.'
It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The  hobbits
wrapped themselves  up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the
creak  of  the wheels and the  slow          clop   of  the ponies' hoofs.  The  waggon
seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him  Pippin was  nodding towards
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog.
They reached the  entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked  by
two tall white posts  that suddenly loomed up  on their right. Farmer Maggot
drew  in his  ponies  and the  waggon creaked  to a  halt.  They  were  just
beginning  lo scramble out, when suddenly they heard what  they had all been
dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them.
Maggot  jumped  down  and stood holding the  ponies' heads, and peering
forward into the gloom.        Clip-clop, clip-clop      came the approaching rider. The
fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air.
'You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,' said  Sam anxiously. 'You get down
in the waggon and cover up with  blankets, and we'll send this  rider to the
rightabouts!'  He climbed out  and went to the  farmer's side.  Black Riders
would have to ride over him to get near the waggon.
Clop-clop, clop-clop.     The rider was nearly on them.
'Hallo there!' called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short.
They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yard
or two ahead. 'Now then!'  said the  farmer, throwing the  reins to  Sam and
striding forward. 'Don't you come a step nearer! What do you want, and where
are you going?'
'I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?' said a muffled voice - but the
voice was  the voice of Merry Brandybuck.  A dark lantern was uncovered, and
its light fell on the astonished face of the farmer.
'Mr. Merry!' he cried.
'Yes, of course! Who  did you think it was?' said Merry coming forward.
As  he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he seemed suddenly  to
diminish to  ordinary  hobbit-size. He was  riding a pony, and a  scarf  was
swathed round his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog.
Frodo  sprang  out of  the waggon to greet  him. 'So  there you are  at
last!'  said Merry.  'I was beginning to wonder if you would  turn up at all
today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across
and rode up  towards Stock to see if you had fallen in  any ditches. But I'm
blest  if  I  know  which way  you  have come. Where did you  find them, Mr.
Maggot? In your duck-pond?'
'No,  I  caught 'em trespassing,'  said the farmer, 'and nearly set  my
dogs on  'em;  but they'll tell  you all the story,  I've no doubt.  Now, if
you'll excuse  me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and  all, I'd best be turning for
home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.'
He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. 'Well, good  night to
you all,' he said. 'It's been a queer day, and no mistake. But all's well as
ends well; though perhaps  we should not say  that  until  we reach  our own
doors. I'll not deny that I'll be glad now when I  do.' He lit his lanterns,
and got up.  Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. 'I was
nearly forgetting,' he said. 'Mrs. Maggot put this up  for Mr. Baggins, with
her compliments.'  He handed  it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of
thanks and good-nights.
They  watched  the  pale  rings  of  light  round his lanterns as  they
dwindled  into  the  foggy night. Suddenly  Frodo laughed: from the  covered
basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising.
