returned the glance, less in height and girth than most. He caught the glint
of clear grey eyes; and then he  shivered, for  it came suddenly to him that
it was the face of one without hope who goes in search of death.
On  down  the grey road they went beside  the  Snowbourn rushing on its
stones; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn, where many sad
faces
of women looked out from dark doors; and so without horn or harp or music of
men's voices the great  ride into the East  began with  which  the songs  of
Rohan were busy for many long lives of men thereafter.
From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning
with thane and captain rode Thengel's son:
to Edoras he came, the ancient halls
of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded;
golden timbers were in gloom mantled.
Farewell he bade to his free people,
hearth and high-seat, and the hallowed places,
where long he had feasted ere the light faded.
Forth rode the king, fear behind him,
fate before him. Fealty kept he;
oaths he had taken, all fulfilled them.
Forth rode Thjoden. Five nights and days
east and onward rode the Eorlingas
through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood,
six thousand spears to Sunlending,
Mundburg the mighty under Mindolluin,
Sea-kings' city in the South-kingdom
foe-beleaguered, fire-encircled.
Doom drove them on. Darkness took them,
Horse and horseman; hoofbeats afar
sank into silence: so the songs tell us.
It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras, although
it  was then but noon by the  hour. There  he halted only  a short while and
strengthened his host by some three  score  of Riders that  came late to the
weapontake. Now having eaten he made ready to set out  again, and  he wished
his esquire  a kindly farewell. But Merry begged for the last time not to be
parted from him.
'This is no journey for  such steeds  as  Stybba,  as I have told you '
said  Thjoden.  'And  in such a battle as we think to  make on the fields of
Gondor what  would  you do, Master  Meriadoc, sword-thain though you be,
and
greater of heart than of stature?'
'As  for that,  who can tell?' answered Merry. 'But why, lord,  did you
receive me as sword-thain, if not to stay by your side? And I would not have
it said of me in song only that I was always left behind!'
'I  received you for your safe-keeping,' answered Thjoden; 'and also to
do  as I might bid. None of my Riders can  bear you as burden. If the battle
were before my gates, maybe your deeds would be remembered by the
minstrels;
but it  is a  hundred leagues and two to Mundburg  where Denethor is lord. I
will say no more.'
Merry  bowed and  went  away  unhappily,  and  stared  at the lines  of
horsemen. Already the companies were preparing to start: men were tightening
girths, looking  to saddles, caressing their horses; some gazed uneasily  at
the lowering sky. Unnoticed a Rider came up and spoke softly in the hobbit's
ear.
' Where will wants not, a way opens         , so we say,' he whispered; 'and so I
have found myself.' Merry looked up and saw that it was the young Rider
whom
he had  noticed in the morning. 'You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark
goes: I see it in your face.'
'I do,' said Merry.
'Then you  shall go with me,'  said the Rider. 'I will bear  you before
me, under my cloak until we are far afield, and this darkness is yet darker.
Such good will should not be denied. Say no more to any man, but come!'
'Thank you indeed!' said Merry. 'Thank you, sir, though I  do not  know
your name.'
'Do you not?' said the Rider softly. 'Then call me Dernhelm.'
Thus it  came to pass that  when the  king set out, before Dernhelm sat
Meriadoc the hobbit, and the great  grey steed  Windfola  made little of the
burden; for Dernhelm  was  less in  weight than many men, though  lithe  and
well-knit in frame.
On  into the shadow they  rode. In  the willow-thickets where Snowbourn
flowed into Entwash, twelve leagues east of Edoras,  they camped that night.
And  then on  again  through the Folde; and through  the  Fenmarch, where to
their  right great  oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the  hills  under  the
shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but  away  to their left
the mists lay on the marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash. And as they  rode
rumour came of war in the North. Lone men, riding wild, brought word of foes
assailing their east-borders, of orc-hosts marching in the Wold of Rohan.
'Ride on! Ride on!'  cried Jomer. 'Too late now to turn aside. The fens
of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!'
And  so King Thjoden departed from his own realm, and mile  by mile the
long  road  wound  away,  and  the  beacon  hills  marched  past:  Calenhad,
Min-Rimmon, Erelas, Nardol. But  their fires  were  quenched. All  the lands
were grey and still;  and  ever the shadow  deepened before them,  and  hope
waned in every heart.
