their  right great  oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the  hills  under  the
shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but  away  to their left
the mists lay on the marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash. And as they  rode
rumour came of war in the North. Lone men, riding wild, brought word of foes
assailing their east-borders, of orc-hosts marching in the Wold of Rohan.
'Ride on! Ride on!'  cried Jomer. 'Too late now to turn aside. The fens
of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!'
And  so King Thjoden departed from his own realm, and mile  by mile the
long  road  wound  away,  and  the  beacon  hills  marched  past:  Calenhad,
Min-Rimmon, Erelas, Nardol. But  their fires  were  quenched. All  the lands
were grey and still;  and  ever the shadow  deepened before them,  and  hope
waned in every heart.
Chapter 4. The Siege of Gondor
Pippin was  roused by Gandalf. Candles  were lit in their chamber,  for
only  a dim  twilight came through the  windows; the air  was  heavy as with
approaching thunder.
'What is the time?' said Pippin yawning.
'Past the second hour,' said Gandalf. 'Time to get up and make yourself
presentable.  You  are summoned to  the Lord  of the City to learn your  new
duties.'
'And will he provide breakfast?'
'No! I have provided  it: all that you will get till noon. Food  is now
doled out by order.'
Pippin  looked  ruefully  at  the  small  loaf  and  (he  thought) very
inadequate  pat of  butter which was set out for him,  beside  a cup of thin
milk. 'Why did you bring me here?' he said.
'You know quite well,' said Gandalf. 'To keep you out  of mischief; and
if you do  not  like being here, you can remember  that  you  brought it  on
yourself.' Pippin said no more.
Before  long  he was  walking  with  Gandalf  once  more down  the cold
corridor to the  door of the Tower Hall. There Denethor sat in a grey gloom,
like an old patient spider, Pippin  thought: he  did not seem  to have moved
since the day before. He beckoned Gandalf to a seat, but Pippin was left for
a while standing unheeded. Presently the old man turned to him:
'Well, Master Peregrin,  I hope that you used yesterday to your profit,
and to your liking? Though  I fear that the board is barer in this city than
you could wish.'
Pippin had  an uncomfortable feeling that most  of what he had said  or
done was somehow known to the Lord of the City, and much was guessed of
what
he thought as well. He did not answer.
'What would you do in my service?'
'I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties.'
'I will, when I learn what you are fit for,' said Denethor. 'But that I
shall learn soonest,  maybe,  if  I  keep you beside  me. The esquire of  my
chamber  has begged leave to  go to the out-garrison, so  you shall take his
place for a while. You shall wait  on me, bear errands,  and talk to me,  if
war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?'
'Yes,' said Pippin.  'Well, yes, well enough for my  own people. But we
have no songs  fit for  great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom  sing of
anything more terrible  than wind  or rain. And most  of  my songs are about
things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.'
'And why should such songs be unfit for my halls, or for such  hours as
these? We who have lived long under the  Shadow may surely listen to  echoes
from  a land  untroubled  by  it? Then we may  feel that our  vigil was  not
fruitless, though it may have been thankless.'
Pippin's heart sank. He did not  relish the idea of singing any song of
the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic  ones that he
knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an  occasion. He was however
spared the ordeal for  the present. He  was not commanded  to sing. Denethor
turned to Gandalf, asking questions about  the Rohirrim and  their policies,
and the position of Jomer, the king's nephew. Pippin marvelled at the amount
that the Lord seemed to  know about a people that  lived far away, though it
must, he thought, be many years since Denethor himself had ridden abroad.
Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for a while.
'Go to the armouries of the Citadel,' he said, 'and get you there the livery
and gear of the  Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return
when you are clad!'
It was  as he said; and Pippin soon  found himself  arrayed in  strange
garments, all of black and silver. He  had a small hauberk, its rings forged
of steel,  maybe,  yet black  as  jet; and a high-crowned  helm  with  small
raven-wings on  either  side, set with  a  silver star in the centre of  the
circlet.  Above the mail was a short surcoat  of black, but broidered on the
breast in silver with the token of the Tree. His old clothes were folded and
put away, but he was permitted to  keep the grey cloak of Lurien, though not
to wear it  when  on duty.  He looked now, had he  known it, verily                    Ernil  i
Pheriannath     , the Prince of  the Halflings, that folk had  called him; but he
felt uncomfortable. And the gloom began to weigh on his spirits.
It  was  dark and dim all day. From the sunless dawn until evening  the
heavy shadow  had deepened,  and all hearts in the City were oppressed.  Far
above  a great cloud streamed slowly westward from the Black Land,
devouring
light, borne upon a wind of war; but below the air was still and breathless,
