place for a while. You shall wait  on me, bear errands,  and talk to me,  if
war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?'
'Yes,' said Pippin.  'Well, yes, well enough for my  own people. But we
have no songs  fit for  great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom  sing of
anything more terrible  than wind  or rain. And most  of  my songs are about
things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.'
'And why should such songs be unfit for my halls, or for such  hours as
these? We who have lived long under the  Shadow may surely listen to  echoes
from  a land  untroubled  by  it? Then we may  feel that our  vigil was  not
fruitless, though it may have been thankless.'
Pippin's heart sank. He did not  relish the idea of singing any song of
the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic  ones that he
knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an  occasion. He was however
spared the ordeal for  the present. He  was not commanded  to sing. Denethor
turned to Gandalf, asking questions about  the Rohirrim and  their policies,
and the position of Jomer, the king's nephew. Pippin marvelled at the amount
that the Lord seemed to  know about a people that  lived far away, though it
must, he thought, be many years since Denethor himself had ridden abroad.
Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for a while.
'Go to the armouries of the Citadel,' he said, 'and get you there the livery
and gear of the  Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return
when you are clad!'
It was  as he said; and Pippin soon  found himself  arrayed in  strange
garments, all of black and silver. He  had a small hauberk, its rings forged
of steel,  maybe,  yet black  as  jet; and a high-crowned  helm  with  small
raven-wings on  either  side, set with  a  silver star in the centre of  the
circlet.  Above the mail was a short surcoat  of black, but broidered on the
breast in silver with the token of the Tree. His old clothes were folded and
put away, but he was permitted to  keep the grey cloak of Lurien, though not
to wear it  when  on duty.  He looked now, had he  known it, verily                    Ernil  i
Pheriannath     , the Prince of  the Halflings, that folk had  called him; but he
felt uncomfortable. And the gloom began to weigh on his spirits.
It  was  dark and dim all day. From the sunless dawn until evening  the
heavy shadow  had deepened,  and all hearts in the City were oppressed.  Far
above  a great cloud streamed slowly westward from the Black Land,
devouring
light, borne upon a wind of war; but below the air was still and breathless,
as if all the Vale of Anduin waited for the onset of a ruinous storm.
About  the eleventh hour, released  at  last for  a while from service.
Pippin came  out and  went  in search  of food and  drink to cheer his heavy
heart  and make his task of waiting more  supportable. In  the messes he met
Beregond again, who  had just  come from an errand over the Pelennor  out to
the Guard-towers upon the Causeway. Together they strolled out to the walls;
for  Pippin felt imprisoned indoors, and stifled even in the  lofty citadel.
Now  they sat  side by side again  in the embrasure  looking eastward, where
they had eaten and talked the day before.
It was the sunset-hour, but  the great pall had  now stretched far into
the  West, and  only  as it sank at last into the Sea did the Sun escape  to
send  out a brief farewell  gleam before  the night, even as Frodo saw it at
the Cross-roads touching the head of the fallen king. But  to  the fields of
the Pelennor, under the shadow of Mindolluin, there came no gleam: they were
brown and drear.
Already it  seemed years to  Pippin  since he had sat  there before, in
some half-forgotten time when he had still  been a hobbit,  a  light-hearted
wanderer touched little by the perils he had passed through. Now  he was one
small soldier in a city preparing for a great assault, clad in the proud but
sombre manner of the Tower of Guard.
In some  other time and place Pippin  might have been pleased with  his
new array,  but he knew  now  that he was taking part in no  play; he was in
deadly  earnest the servant of  a grim  master  in the  greatest  peril. The
hauberk was burdensome, and the helm weighed upon his head. His cloak he
had
cast aside  upon the seat. He turned his tired  gaze away from  the darkling
fields below and yawned, and then he sighed.
'You are weary of this day?' said Beregond.
'Yes,'  said Pippin, 'very: tired out with idleness and waiting. I have
kicked my  heels  at the door of my master's  chamber  for many  slow hours,
while  he  has  debated with Gandalf and the Prince and other great persons.
And I'm not  used,  Master Beregond, to waiting hungry on others while  they
eat. It is a sore trial for a hobbit, that. No doubt you will think I should
feel the honour more  deeply. But  what is the good  of such honour?  Indeed
what is the  good even of  food  and  drink under this creeping shadow? What
does it  mean?  The very air seems thick and brown! Do  you often  have such
glooms when the wind is in the East?'
'Nay,'  said  Beregond, 'this is no weather of the world. This  is some
device  of his  malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he
sends  to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth indeed. I wish the  Lord
Faramir would  return. He  would not be dismayed. But now,  who  knows if he
will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?'
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'Gandalf, too, is anxious.  He was disappointed.  I
think, not  to  find Faramir here. And where has he  got to himself? He left
the  Lord's council before the noon-meal,  and  in  no good  mood either,  I
thought. Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.'
Suddenly as they talked  they were  stricken dumb, frozen as it were to
listening  stones. Pippin cowered down  with his hands pressed to his  ears;
but Beregond, who  had been  looking out from the battlement  as he spoke of
Faramir, remained  there, stiffened, staring  out with starting eyes. Pippin
knew the shuddering cry that he had heard: it was the same that he had heard
long  ago  in  the Marish  of the Shire, but now it was grown  in  power and
hatred, piercing the heart with a poisonous despair.
At last Beregond spoke with an effort. 'They have come!' he said. 'Take
courage and look! There are fell things below.'
Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the wall.
The Pelennor lay dim  beneath him, fading away to the scarce guessed line of
the  Great  River. But  now  wheeling  swiftly across  it,  like  shadows of
untimely  night, he  saw in  the middle airs  below him five birdlike forms,
horrible as carrion-fowl  yet greater than  eagles, cruel as death. Now they
swooped near, venturing almost within bowshot of the walls, now they circled
away.
'Black Riders!'  muttered Pippin.  'Black  Riders  of the air! But see,
Beregond!' he cried. 'They are  looking for something, surely? See  how they
wheel and swoop,  always down to that  point over  there!  And  can  you see
something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four
or five. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf! Gandalf save us!'
Another  long screech rose and fell,  and  he threw  himself back again
from the  wall, panting like  a  hunted  animal.  Faint and seemingly remote
through that shuddering cry he  heard  winding  up from below the sound of a
trumpet ending on a long high note.
'Faramir!  The  Lord Faramir! It is  his call!' cried  Beregond. 'Brave
heart! But how can he win to the  Gate, if these  foul hell-hawks have other
weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate.  No! the
