'Nay,'  said  Beregond, 'this is no weather of the world. This  is some
device  of his  malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he
sends  to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth indeed. I wish the  Lord
Faramir would  return. He  would not be dismayed. But now,  who  knows if he
will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?'
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'Gandalf, too, is anxious.  He was disappointed.  I
think, not  to  find Faramir here. And where has he  got to himself? He left
the  Lord's council before the noon-meal,  and  in  no good  mood either,  I
thought. Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.'
Suddenly as they talked  they were  stricken dumb, frozen as it were to
listening  stones. Pippin cowered down  with his hands pressed to his  ears;
but Beregond, who  had been  looking out from the battlement  as he spoke of
Faramir, remained  there, stiffened, staring  out with starting eyes. Pippin
knew the shuddering cry that he had heard: it was the same that he had heard
long  ago  in  the Marish  of the Shire, but now it was grown  in  power and
hatred, piercing the heart with a poisonous despair.
At last Beregond spoke with an effort. 'They have come!' he said. 'Take
courage and look! There are fell things below.'
Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the wall.
The Pelennor lay dim  beneath him, fading away to the scarce guessed line of
the  Great  River. But  now  wheeling  swiftly across  it,  like  shadows of
untimely  night, he  saw in  the middle airs  below him five birdlike forms,
horrible as carrion-fowl  yet greater than  eagles, cruel as death. Now they
swooped near, venturing almost within bowshot of the walls, now they circled
away.
'Black Riders!'  muttered Pippin.  'Black  Riders  of the air! But see,
Beregond!' he cried. 'They are  looking for something, surely? See  how they
wheel and swoop,  always down to that  point over  there!  And  can  you see
something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four
or five. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf! Gandalf save us!'
Another  long screech rose and fell,  and  he threw  himself back again
from the  wall, panting like  a  hunted  animal.  Faint and seemingly remote
through that shuddering cry he  heard  winding  up from below the sound of a
trumpet ending on a long high note.
'Faramir!  The  Lord Faramir! It is  his call!' cried  Beregond. 'Brave
heart! But how can he win to the  Gate, if these  foul hell-hawks have other
weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate.  No! the
horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown; they are running  on foot.
No,  one is  still  up, but he  rides  back to the others. That will be  the
Captain: he can master both beasts and men. Ah! there one of the foul things
is stooping on him. Help! help! Will no one go out to him? Faramir!'
With  that Beregond sprang away  and ran off into the gloom. Ashamed of
his terror, while Beregond of the Guard thought first of the captain whom he
loved,  Pippin got up and peered out.  At that  moment he caught  a flash of
white and silver coming from the  North, like a small star down on the dusky
fields. It moved with the speed of an arrow and grew as it came,  converging
swiftly with  the flight of  the four men  towards the  Gate.  It seemed  to
Pippin that a  pale light was spread about it and the heavy shadows gave way
before it; and then as  it drew near he thought that he heard, like  an echo
in the walls, a great voice calling.
'Gandalf!' he  cried. 'Gandalf!  He always  turns  up  when things  are
darkest.  Go on!  Go on,  White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf!' he shouted wildly,
like  an  onlooker  at  a  great race urging on a runner who is  far  beyond
encouragement.
But now  the dark  swooping shadows  were  aware  of  the newcomer. One
wheeled towards  him; but it seemed to Pippin that he raised  his hand,  and
from  it a  shaft of  white light  stabbed upwards.  The Nazgyl  gave a long
wailing  cry  and swerved away; and with  that the  four others wavered, and
then rising in swift spirals they  passed away  eastward  vanishing into the
lowering cloud  above; and down  on the Pelennor it seemed for a  while less
dark.
Pippin watched,  and he  saw the  horseman and the White Rider meet and
halt, waiting for those on foot. Men now hurried out to them from the  City;
and soon they all passed from sight under the  outer walls, and he knew that
they were  entering the Gate. Guessing  that they would  come at once to the
Tower and the Steward, he  hurried to the entrance of the citadel.  There he
was  joined by  many others who had watched the race and the rescue from the
high walls.
It was not long before a clamour  was heard  in the streets leading  up
from the outer circles, and there was much cheering and crying of  the names
of Faramir  and Mithrandir. Presently Pippin saw torches, and followed by  a
press of people two horsemen riding slowly:  one was in white but shining no
longer, pale in the twilight as if his  fire was spent  or veiled; the other
was dark  and his  head  was  bowed.  They  dismounted, and  as  grooms took
Shadowfax and the  other  horse,  they walked forward to the sentinel at the
gate: Gandalf  steadily,  his  grey  cloak  flung  back,  and  a fire  still
smouldering in his eyes; the  other,  clad all in green, slowly,  swaying  a
little as a weary or a wounded man.
Pippin pressed  forward  as  they passed  under the  lamp  beneath  the
gate-arch, and when he saw the pale face of Faramir he caught his breath. It
was the face  of one who has been assailed by a great fear  or anguish,  but
has  mastered it and now is quiet. Proud and grave he stood for  a moment as
he spoke to the guard, and Pippin gazing at him saw how closely he resembled
his brother  Boromir - whom Pippin had liked from  the  first,  admiring the
great man's lordly but kindly manner. Yet suddenly for Faramir his heart was
strangely moved with a feeling that  he had  not known before. Here was  one
with  an  air of high nobility such as  Aragorn at times revealed, less high
perhaps, yet also less incalculable and remote: one of the Kings of Men born
into a  later time,  but touched with the  wisdom  and sadness of  the Elder
Race. He knew  now  why Beregond spoke his name with love. He was a
captain
that  men would follow, that he would follow, even under  the shadow  of the
black wings.
'Faramir!'  he  cried aloud  with the others.  'Faramir!'  And  Faramir
catching his strange voice among the clamour  of the men of the City, turned
and looked down at him and was amazed.
'Whence  come  you?'  he said. 'A halfling,  and in the  livery  of the
Tower! Whence...?'
But  with that Gandalf stepped  to his side and spoke. 'He came with me
from  the land of the Halflings,' he said. 'He came with  me. But let us not
tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come
with  us. Indeed  he  must,  for if he  does not forget his new  duties more
easily than I do, he must attend on his  lord  again within this hour. Come,
Pippin, follow us!'
So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the  City.
There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine was brought;
and there Pippin,  hardly noticed, stood behind  the  chair of Denethor  and
felt his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to all that was said.
When Faramir had  taken white bread and drunk a draught of wine, he sat
upon a low chair  at his father's left hand. Removed a little upon the other
side sat Gandalf in a  chair of  carven  wood; and he seemed  at first to be
