Shadowfax and the  other  horse,  they walked forward to the sentinel at the
gate: Gandalf  steadily,  his  grey  cloak  flung  back,  and  a fire  still
smouldering in his eyes; the  other,  clad all in green, slowly,  swaying  a
little as a weary or a wounded man.
Pippin pressed  forward  as  they passed  under the  lamp  beneath  the
gate-arch, and when he saw the pale face of Faramir he caught his breath. It
was the face  of one who has been assailed by a great fear  or anguish,  but
has  mastered it and now is quiet. Proud and grave he stood for  a moment as
he spoke to the guard, and Pippin gazing at him saw how closely he resembled
his brother  Boromir - whom Pippin had liked from  the  first,  admiring the
great man's lordly but kindly manner. Yet suddenly for Faramir his heart was
strangely moved with a feeling that  he had  not known before. Here was  one
with  an  air of high nobility such as  Aragorn at times revealed, less high
perhaps, yet also less incalculable and remote: one of the Kings of Men born
into a  later time,  but touched with the  wisdom  and sadness of  the Elder
Race. He knew  now  why Beregond spoke his name with love. He was a
captain
that  men would follow, that he would follow, even under  the shadow  of the
black wings.
'Faramir!'  he  cried aloud  with the others.  'Faramir!'  And  Faramir
catching his strange voice among the clamour  of the men of the City, turned
and looked down at him and was amazed.
'Whence  come  you?'  he said. 'A halfling,  and in the  livery  of the
Tower! Whence...?'
But  with that Gandalf stepped  to his side and spoke. 'He came with me
from  the land of the Halflings,' he said. 'He came with  me. But let us not
tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come
with  us. Indeed  he  must,  for if he  does not forget his new  duties more
easily than I do, he must attend on his  lord  again within this hour. Come,
Pippin, follow us!'
So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the  City.
There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine was brought;
and there Pippin,  hardly noticed, stood behind  the  chair of Denethor  and
felt his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to all that was said.
When Faramir had  taken white bread and drunk a draught of wine, he sat
upon a low chair  at his father's left hand. Removed a little upon the other
side sat Gandalf in a  chair of  carven  wood; and he seemed  at first to be
asleep. For at the beginning Faramir spoke only of the errand  upon which he
had been sent out ten days before, and he brought tidings of Ithilien and of
movements of the Enemy and his allies; and he told of the  fight on the road
when  the  men of Harad  and their  great beast were overthrown:  a  captain
reporting  to his master  such matters as had often been heard before, small
things of  border-war that  now seemed useless  and  petty,  shorn of  their
renown.
Then suddenly  Faramir looked at Pippin. 'But now  we  come  to strange
matters,' he said.  'For this  is not the first  halfling that  I  have seen
walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.'
At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair;  but  he said
nothing, and  with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin's lips. Denethor
looked at their faces  and  nodded his head, as though  in sign  that he had
read much  there before it  was spoken. Slowly, while the  others sat silent
and  still,  Faramir  told  his tale, with  his  eyes  for the most part  on
Gandalf, though now and again his glance strayed to Pippin, as if to refresh
his memory of others that he had seen.
As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant and
of  the events  at Henneth  Annyn, Pippin became aware that  Gandalf's hands
were  trembling as they clutched the carven wood. White they seemed now
and
very old,  and as  he looked at them,  suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin
knew  that Gandalf, Gandalf himself, was troubled, even afraid.  The  air of
the room was close and still. At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with
the travellers, and of their resolve to go to Cirith Ungol,  his voice fell,
and he shook his head and sighed. Then Gandalf sprang up.
'Cirith Ungol?  Morgul Vale?'  he said. 'The  time,  Faramir, the time?
When did you part with them? When would they reach that accursed valley?'
'I parted with them in  the morning two days ago,' said Faramir. 'It is
fifteen leagues thence to the vale  of the Morgulduin, if they went straight
south; and then they would  be  still five leagues westward of  the accursed
Tower.  At  swiftest they could not come  there before today, and maybe they
have not come there yet. Indeed I see what you fear. But the darkness is not
due to their venture.  It began yestereve, and all Ithilien was under shadow
last night.  It is clear to me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on
us, and its hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left
my keeping.'
Gandalf paced the floor. 'The  morning  of two days ago,  nigh on three
days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?'
'Some  twenty-five leagues as a  bird flies,' answered  Faramir. 'But I
could not  come more swiftly.  Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle
in the River  northward which we hold in defence; and horses are kept on the
hither bank. As the dark drew on I  knew that  haste was  needed,  so I rode
thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I
sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that
I have not done ill?' He looked at his father.
'Ill?' cried Denethor,  and his eyes flashed suddenly. 'Why do you ask?
The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my  judgement on all
your
deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence,  yet it is long  now  since you
turned from your own way at my counsel. See, you have  spoken  skilfully, as
ever; but  I, have I not seen your  eye fixed on Mithrandir, seeking whether
you said well or too much? He has long had your heart in his keeping.
'My son, your  father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear, as
was  my wont; and  little of what you have half said  or left unsaid  is now
hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas, alas for Boromir!'
'If what I have done  displeases you, my father,' said Faramir quietly,
'I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement
was thrust on me.'
'Would that have availed to change your judgement?' said Denethor. 'You
would still have done just so, I deem.  I know you well. Ever your desire is
to  appear lordly and generous as  a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may
well befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate
hours gentleness may be repaid with death.'
'So be it,' said Faramir.
'So  be  it!' cried  Denethor.  'But  not  with your  death  only, Lord
Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it
is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.'
'Do you wish then,' said Faramir, 'that our places had been exchanged?'
'Yes,  I wish that indeed,' said Denethor. 'For Boromir was loyal to me
and no wizard's pupil. He would have remembered his father's need, and would
not  have squandered what  fortune gave.  He would have brought me  a mighty
gift.'
For a moment Faramir's restraint gave way. 'I would ask you, my father,
