Gandalf paced the floor. 'The  morning  of two days ago,  nigh on three
days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?'
'Some  twenty-five leagues as a  bird flies,' answered  Faramir. 'But I
could not  come more swiftly.  Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle
in the River  northward which we hold in defence; and horses are kept on the
hither bank. As the dark drew on I  knew that  haste was  needed,  so I rode
thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I
sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that
I have not done ill?' He looked at his father.
'Ill?' cried Denethor,  and his eyes flashed suddenly. 'Why do you ask?
The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my  judgement on all
your
deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence,  yet it is long  now  since you
turned from your own way at my counsel. See, you have  spoken  skilfully, as
ever; but  I, have I not seen your  eye fixed on Mithrandir, seeking whether
you said well or too much? He has long had your heart in his keeping.
'My son, your  father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear, as
was  my wont; and  little of what you have half said  or left unsaid  is now
hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas, alas for Boromir!'
'If what I have done  displeases you, my father,' said Faramir quietly,
'I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement
was thrust on me.'
'Would that have availed to change your judgement?' said Denethor. 'You
would still have done just so, I deem.  I know you well. Ever your desire is
to  appear lordly and generous as  a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may
well befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate
hours gentleness may be repaid with death.'
'So be it,' said Faramir.
'So  be  it!' cried  Denethor.  'But  not  with your  death  only, Lord
Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it
is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.'
'Do you wish then,' said Faramir, 'that our places had been exchanged?'
'Yes,  I wish that indeed,' said Denethor. 'For Boromir was loyal to me
and no wizard's pupil. He would have remembered his father's need, and would
not  have squandered what  fortune gave.  He would have brought me  a mighty
gift.'
For a moment Faramir's restraint gave way. 'I would ask you, my father,
to remember why it was that I,  not he, was in Ithilien. On  one occasion at
least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It  was the Lord of the City
that gave the errand to him.'
'Stir not the  bitterness in  the cup that  I mixed  for myself,'  said
Denethor.  'Have I  not tasted it now  many nights upon my tongue foreboding
that worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I find. Would it were not so!
Would that this thing had come to me!'
'Comfort yourself!'  said Gandalf.  'In  no  case  would  Boromir  have
brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet you
deceive yourself. He would have stretched out  his hand to this  thing,  and
taking it he would have fallen. He would have kept it  for his own, and when
he returned you would not have known your son.'
The face of Denethor set  hard and cold. 'You found Boromir less apt to
your hand, did you not?' he said softly. 'But I who  was his father say that
he would have  brought it to me.  You are wise,  maybe, Mithrandir, yet with
all your subtleties you have not all wisdom.  Counsels may be found that are
neither the  webs  of wizards  nor the haste of fools. I have in this matter
more lore and wisdom than you deem. '
'What then is your wisdom?' said Gandalf.
'Enough to  perceive  that there are two follies to avoid. To  use this
thing is  perilous. At  this  hour, to send it  in  the hands  of a  witless
halfling into the land of the Enemy himself, as you  have done, and this son
of mine, that is madness.'
'And the Lord Denethor what would he have done?'
'Neither. But most surely  not  for any argument would he have set this
thing at a hazard beyond all but a  fool's hope, risking our utter ruin,  if
the  Enemy  should  recover what he lost. Nay, it  should  have  been  kept,
hidden, hidden  dark and deep. Not used, I say, unless  at the uttermost end
of need, but set beyond his grasp, save by a victory so final that what then
befell would not trouble us, being dead.'
'You  think,  as  is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,' said Gandalf.
'Yet there are other men and other lives, and time still to be.  And for me,
I pity even his slaves.'
'And where  will other  men look for help, if  Gondor  falls?' answered
Denethor. 'If I had this thing  now in  the deep  vaults of this citadel, we
should not then  shake with  dread  under this gloom, fearing the worst, and
our counsels would  be  undisturbed. If you do not trust  me  to endure  the
test, you do not know me yet.'
'Nonetheless I do not trust you,' said Gandalf. 'Had I done so, I could
have sent this thing hither to  your keeping  and  spared myself and  others
much  anguish.  And now hearing  you speak  I trust you  less, no  more than
Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do  not trust myself in this, and I refused
this thing, even as  a  freely given gift. You  are strong and can still  in
some matters govern  yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing,
it  would  have  overthrown  you.  Were  it  buried  beneath  the  roots  of
Mindolluin, still it would burn  your mind away, as the darkness grows,  and
the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us.'
For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced Gandalf, and
Pippin felt  once  more the  strain between  their wills;  but now almost it
seemed  as if their glances were like blades  from eye to eye, flickering as
they  fenced. Pippin trembled fearing  some  dreadful  stroke.  But suddenly
Denethor relaxed and grew cold again. He shrugged his shoulders.
'If I had! If you had!' he said. 'Such words and ifs are  vain.  It has
gone into the Shadow, and only time will show  what  doom awaits it  and us.
The time will not  be long. In what is left, let all who fight  the Enemy in
their fashion be at one, and keep hope while they may, and after hope  still
the hardihood to die  free.' He turned to  Faramir.  'What think  you of the
garrison at Osgiliath?'
'It is not strong,'  said Faramir. 'I have sent the company of Ithilien
to strengthen it, as I have said.'
'Not enough, I deem,' said Denethor. 'It is  there that the first  blow
will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.'
'There  and elsewhere  in many places,' said Faramir, and sighed. 'Alas
for my brother, whom I too loved!' He rose. 'May I have your leave, father?'
And then he swayed and leaned upon his father's chair.
'You are weary, I see,' said Denethor.  'You  have ridden fast and far,
and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.'
'Let us not speak of that!' said Faramir.
'Then  we  will  not,'  said  Denethor. 'Go  now and  rest as you  may.
Tomorrow's need will be sterner.'
All now took leave of the Lord of the City and went to rest  while they
still could.  Outside there  was a starless blackness as Gandalf with Pippin
beside  him bearing a small torch, made  his way to their  lodging. They did
not speak until they were behind closed  doors. Then  at  last  Pippin  took
