test, you do not know me yet.'
'Nonetheless I do not trust you,' said Gandalf. 'Had I done so, I could
have sent this thing hither to  your keeping  and  spared myself and  others
much  anguish.  And now hearing  you speak  I trust you  less, no  more than
Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do  not trust myself in this, and I refused
this thing, even as  a  freely given gift. You  are strong and can still  in
some matters govern  yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing,
it  would  have  overthrown  you.  Were  it  buried  beneath  the  roots  of
Mindolluin, still it would burn  your mind away, as the darkness grows,  and
the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us.'
For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced Gandalf, and
Pippin felt  once  more the  strain between  their wills;  but now almost it
seemed  as if their glances were like blades  from eye to eye, flickering as
they  fenced. Pippin trembled fearing  some  dreadful  stroke.  But suddenly
Denethor relaxed and grew cold again. He shrugged his shoulders.
'If I had! If you had!' he said. 'Such words and ifs are  vain.  It has
gone into the Shadow, and only time will show  what  doom awaits it  and us.
The time will not  be long. In what is left, let all who fight  the Enemy in
their fashion be at one, and keep hope while they may, and after hope  still
the hardihood to die  free.' He turned to  Faramir.  'What think  you of the
garrison at Osgiliath?'
'It is not strong,'  said Faramir. 'I have sent the company of Ithilien
to strengthen it, as I have said.'
'Not enough, I deem,' said Denethor. 'It is  there that the first  blow
will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.'
'There  and elsewhere  in many places,' said Faramir, and sighed. 'Alas
for my brother, whom I too loved!' He rose. 'May I have your leave, father?'
And then he swayed and leaned upon his father's chair.
'You are weary, I see,' said Denethor.  'You  have ridden fast and far,
and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.'
'Let us not speak of that!' said Faramir.
'Then  we  will  not,'  said  Denethor. 'Go  now and  rest as you  may.
Tomorrow's need will be sterner.'
All now took leave of the Lord of the City and went to rest  while they
still could.  Outside there  was a starless blackness as Gandalf with Pippin
beside  him bearing a small torch, made  his way to their  lodging. They did
not speak until they were behind closed  doors. Then  at  last  Pippin  took
Gandalf's hand.
'Tell me,' he  said, 'is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at least
mostly for Frodo.'
Gandalf put his hand on Pippin's head. 'There never was much  hope,' he
answered.  'Just a  fool's hope,  as  I have  been told. And when I heard of
Cirith Ungol------' He broke  off and  strode to  the window as if his  eyes
could pierce the night  in the East. 'Cirith Ungol!' he  muttered. 'Why that
way, I wonder?' He turned.  'Just now, Pippin,  my heart almost  failed  me,
hearing that name.  And yet  in truth  I believe that  the news that Faramir
brings has some hope in it. For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his
war at last and made the first  move while Frodo was still free. So  now for
many days  he will have his eye turned this way and that, away  from his own
land. And yet, Pippin, I  feel from afar his haste and  fear.  He  has begun
sooner than he would. Something has happened to stir him.'
Gandalf  stood for a moment in thought.  'Maybe,'  he  muttered. 'Maybe
even your foolishness helped,  my lad. Let me see: some five days ago now he
would discover that  we had thrown  down  Saruman and had  taken the  Stone.
Still  what of that?  We could  not use it to much  purpose, or without  his
knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His time  draws  near. And he  is strong and
stern underneath, Pippin; bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and
dare great risks  at  need. That may be it. He may have used  the  Stone and
shown  himself  to the  Enemy,  challenging  him, for  this very purpose.  I
wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come, if
they do not come  too  late.  There are evil days ahead.  To sleep  while we
may!'
'But,' said Pippin.
'But what?' said Gandalf. 'Only one          but  will I allow tonight.'
'Gollum,' said  Pippin. 'How  on  earth could they  be going about                  with
him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place
he was taking them to any more than you do. What is wrong?'
'I cannot answer  that now,' said Gandalf. 'Yet  my heart guessed  that
Frodo and Gollum  would  meet  before the end. For good, or for evil. But of
Cirith  Ungol  I  will  not speak  tonight.  Treachery,  treachery  I  fear;
treachery  of  that  miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us  remember
that a traitor may betray himself and  do good that he does not  intend.  It
can be so, sometimes. Good night! '
The next day came with a morning like  a brown  dusk, and the hearts of
men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low again. The winged
Shadows were  not  seen again  that day,  yet  ever and anon, high above the
city, a faint cry would come,  and  many who heard  it  would stand stricken
with a passing dread, while the less stout-hearted quailed and wept.
And now Faramir was gone again. 'They give him no rest,' some murmured.
'The Lord drives his son too hard, and  now he must do the duty of  two, for
himself  and  for  the  one that  will  not return.'  And  ever  men  looked
northward, asking: 'Where are the Riders of Rohan?'
In truth Faramir did not  go  by  his own choosing. But the Lord of the
City  was master of his  Council,  and he was in no mood that day  to bow to
others. Early in the morning the  Council had been summoned.  There  all the
captains judged that because of the threat in the South their force  was too
weak  to  make any stroke of  war on  their own part,  unless perchance  the
Riders of Rohan yet should come. Meanwhile they must man the walls and
wait.
'Yet,'  said  Denethor,  'we  should  not  lightly  abandon  the  outer
defences,  the Rammas made with so  great  a  labour. And the Enemy must
pay
dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in  force to assail
the City, either north of Cair Andros because of  the marshes, or southwards
towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats.
It  is at  Osgiliath that he  will  put his weight, as before  when  Boromir
denied him the passage.'
'That was but a trial,' said Faramir. 'Today we may make  the Enemy pay
ten times our  loss at  the passage and yet  rue  the  exchange.  For he can
afford  to lose a host better  than we to lose a company. And the retreat of
those  that we  put out  far afield  will  be perilous, if he wins across in
force.'
'And what of Cair Andros?' said the Prince. 'That, too, must  be  held,
if Osgiliath  is defended.  Let  us  not forget  the danger on our left. The
Rohirrim may  come,  and  they may not. But  Faramir  has  told us  of great
strength drawing ever  to the Black Gate. More than  one host may issue from
it, and strike for more than one passage.'
'Much must be risked in war,' said Denethor. 'Cair Andros is manned and
no more  can be sent so far. But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor
unfought  - not if there  is a captain  here who has still the courage to do
his lord's will.'
