men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low again. The winged
Shadows were  not  seen again  that day,  yet  ever and anon, high above the
city, a faint cry would come,  and  many who heard  it  would stand stricken
with a passing dread, while the less stout-hearted quailed and wept.
And now Faramir was gone again. 'They give him no rest,' some murmured.
'The Lord drives his son too hard, and  now he must do the duty of  two, for
himself  and  for  the  one that  will  not return.'  And  ever  men  looked
northward, asking: 'Where are the Riders of Rohan?'
In truth Faramir did not  go  by  his own choosing. But the Lord of the
City  was master of his  Council,  and he was in no mood that day  to bow to
others. Early in the morning the  Council had been summoned.  There  all the
captains judged that because of the threat in the South their force  was too
weak  to  make any stroke of  war on  their own part,  unless perchance  the
Riders of Rohan yet should come. Meanwhile they must man the walls and
wait.
'Yet,'  said  Denethor,  'we  should  not  lightly  abandon  the  outer
defences,  the Rammas made with so  great  a  labour. And the Enemy must
pay
dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in  force to assail
the City, either north of Cair Andros because of  the marshes, or southwards
towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats.
It  is at  Osgiliath that he  will  put his weight, as before  when  Boromir
denied him the passage.'
'That was but a trial,' said Faramir. 'Today we may make  the Enemy pay
ten times our  loss at  the passage and yet  rue  the  exchange.  For he can
afford  to lose a host better  than we to lose a company. And the retreat of
those  that we  put out  far afield  will  be perilous, if he wins across in
force.'
'And what of Cair Andros?' said the Prince. 'That, too, must  be  held,
if Osgiliath  is defended.  Let  us  not forget  the danger on our left. The
Rohirrim may  come,  and  they may not. But  Faramir  has  told us  of great
strength drawing ever  to the Black Gate. More than  one host may issue from
it, and strike for more than one passage.'
'Much must be risked in war,' said Denethor. 'Cair Andros is manned and
no more  can be sent so far. But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor
unfought  - not if there  is a captain  here who has still the courage to do
his lord's will.'
Then all were silent, but at length Faramir said: 'I do not oppose your
will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what  I can in
his stead - if you command it.'
'I do so,' said Denethor.
'Then farewell!' said Faramir. 'But if I should return, think better of
me!'
'That depends on the manner of your return,' said Denethor.
Gandalf it was that  last spoke  to Faramir ere he  rode east. 'Do  not
throw your live away rashly or in bitterness,' he said. 'You  will be needed
here,  for other things  than war. Your  father loves you, Faramir, and will
remember it ere the end. Farewell!'
So now the Lord Faramir had gone  forth again, and had taken  with  him
such strength of men as were willing to go  or could be spared. On the walls
some gazed through the gloom towards the ruined city, and they wondered
what
chanced there, for nothing could be seen.  And others, as ever, looked north
and counted the leagues to Thjoden in Rohan. 'Will he come? Will he
remember
our old alliance?' they said.
'Yes, he will  come,'  said  Gandalf, 'even  if  he comes too late. But
think! At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than two days
ago,
and the miles are long from Edoras.'
It was night again ere news came. A  man rode in  haste from the fords,
saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was already drawing nigh
to Osgiliath; and it had been joined  by regiments from the South, Haradrim,
cruel and tall. 'And we have learned ' said the messenger, 'that  the  Black
Captain  leads  them once again,  and the fear of him  has passed before him
over the River.'
With those ill-boding words the third day closed since  Pippin came  to
Minas Tirith. Few went to rest, for small hope had any now that even Faramir
could hold the fords for long.
The next day,  though the darkness  had reached  its  full and grew  no
deeper, it weighed heavier  on men's  hearts, and a great dread was on them.
Ill  news came soon  again.  The  passage of  Anduin was won  by  the Enemy.
Faramir was retreating to the wall of  the Pelennor, rallying his men to the
Causeway Forts; but he was ten times outnumbered.
'If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his
heels,' said  the messenger. 'They have paid dear for the  crossing but less
dearly than we  hoped.  The plan has been well laid. It is now  seen that in
secret  they have long been building  floats and barges in great numbers  in
East  Osgiliath.  They  swarmed across  like  beetles.  But  it is the Black
Captain  that  defeats us. Few  will stand and abide even the  rumour of his
coming.  His own folk quail at him,  and they would  slay themselves  at his
bidding.'
'Then I am needed  there more than here,' said Gandalf, and rode off at
once,  and the glimmer  of him  faded soon  from  sight. And  all that night
Pippin alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed eastward.
The bells  of  day had  scarcely  rung  out again,  a  mockery  in  the
unlightened dark, when  far  away he saw  fires spring up, across in the dim
spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood. The  watchmen cried aloud, and
all men in the City stood to arms. Now ever and anon there was a  red flash,
and slowly through the heavy air dull rumbles could be heard.
'They have taken the wall!' men cried. 'They are blasting  breaches  in
it. They are coming!'
'Where  is Faramir?'  cried  Beregond in dismay.  'Say not  that he has
fallen!'
It was  Gandalf that  brought the  first  tidings.  With  a  handful of
horsemen he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line of wains.
They were filled with wounded men, all that could be saved from the wreck of
the Causeway Forts. At  once he went  to Denethor.  The Lord of the City sat
now in a high chamber above the Hall of the White Tower  with Pippin  at his
side;  and through  the dim windows, north and  south and east,  he bent his
dark eyes, as if to pierce the shadows of doom that  ringed him  round. Most
to the north  he looked, and would  pause at whiles to listen as  if by some
ancient art his ears might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away.
'Is Faramir come?' he asked.
'No,' said Gandalf.  'But he still  lived when I  left him. Yet  he  is
resolved  to stay  with the rearguard,  lest  the retreat over  the Pelennor
become a rout.  He may,  perhaps, hold  his men  together long enough, but I
doubt it.  He  is  pitted against a foe too great.  For one has come  that I
feared.'
'Not -  the  Dark  Lord?'  cried Pippin, forgetting  his place  in  his
terror.
