'If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his
heels,' said  the messenger. 'They have paid dear for the  crossing but less
dearly than we  hoped.  The plan has been well laid. It is now  seen that in
secret  they have long been building  floats and barges in great numbers  in
East  Osgiliath.  They  swarmed across  like  beetles.  But  it is the Black
Captain  that  defeats us. Few  will stand and abide even the  rumour of his
coming.  His own folk quail at him,  and they would  slay themselves  at his
bidding.'
'Then I am needed  there more than here,' said Gandalf, and rode off at
once,  and the glimmer  of him  faded soon  from  sight. And  all that night
Pippin alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed eastward.
The bells  of  day had  scarcely  rung  out again,  a  mockery  in  the
unlightened dark, when  far  away he saw  fires spring up, across in the dim
spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood. The  watchmen cried aloud, and
all men in the City stood to arms. Now ever and anon there was a  red flash,
and slowly through the heavy air dull rumbles could be heard.
'They have taken the wall!' men cried. 'They are blasting  breaches  in
it. They are coming!'
'Where  is Faramir?'  cried  Beregond in dismay.  'Say not  that he has
fallen!'
It was  Gandalf that  brought the  first  tidings.  With  a  handful of
horsemen he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line of wains.
They were filled with wounded men, all that could be saved from the wreck of
the Causeway Forts. At  once he went  to Denethor.  The Lord of the City sat
now in a high chamber above the Hall of the White Tower  with Pippin  at his
side;  and through  the dim windows, north and  south and east,  he bent his
dark eyes, as if to pierce the shadows of doom that  ringed him  round. Most
to the north  he looked, and would  pause at whiles to listen as  if by some
ancient art his ears might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away.
'Is Faramir come?' he asked.
'No,' said Gandalf.  'But he still  lived when I  left him. Yet  he  is
resolved  to stay  with the rearguard,  lest  the retreat over  the Pelennor
become a rout.  He may,  perhaps, hold  his men  together long enough, but I
doubt it.  He  is  pitted against a foe too great.  For one has come  that I
feared.'
'Not -  the  Dark  Lord?'  cried Pippin, forgetting  his place  in  his
terror.
Denethor laughed bitterly. 'Nay, not  yet, Master Peregrin! He will not
come save  only to triumph over me when all is  won. He uses  others as  his
weapons. So do  all great lords, if they  are wise,  Master Halfling. Or why
should I sit here in  my tower and think, and watch, and wait, spending even
my sons? For I can still wield a brand.'
He stood up and cast open his long black cloak, and behold! he was clad
in mail beneath,  and girt  with a  long sword, great-hilted in a sheath  of
black and silver. 'Thus have I walked, and thus  now  for many years  have I
slept,' he said, 'lest with age the body should grow soft and timid.'
'Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dyr the most  fell of all his captains
is already master of your outer  walls,'  said Gandalf. 'King of Angmar long
ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgyl, a spear of terror in the hand
of Sauron, shadow of despair.'
'Then, Mithrandir, you  had a  foe to  match you,'  said Denethor. 'For
myself, I  have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts of the Dark
Tower. Is this all that you have returned to say? Or can it be that you have
withdrawn because you are overmatched?'
Pippin  trembled, fearing  that Gandalf would be stung to sudden wrath,
but his fear was needless.  'It  might be so,' Gandalf answered softly. 'But
our trial of strength is not yet come. And if words  spoken  of old be true,
not by the hand of man  shall he fall, and hidden from the Wise  is the doom
that awaits him.  However that may be, the Captain of Despair does not press
forward,  yet.  He rules rather according to  the  wisdom that you have just
spoken, from the rear, driving his slaves in madness on before.
'Nay, I came  rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be  healed; for
the Rammas is  breached far and wide, and soon the host of Morgul will enter
in at many points. And I came chiefly to say this. Soon there will be battle
on  the  fields. A sortie must be made  ready.  Let it be of mounted men. In
them lies our  brief hope, for in one thing only is  the enemy  still poorly
provided: he has few horsemen.'
'And we also have few. Now  would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of
time,' said Denethor.
'We are likely to see other newcomers first,' said  Gandalf. 'Fugitives
from Cair Andros have  already reached us. The isle has fallen. Another army
is come from the Black Gate, crossing from the north-east.'
'Some have accused  you, Mithrandir,  of  delighting to bear ill news,'
said Denethor, 'but to  me  this is  no longer news: it  was known to mw ere
nightfall yesterday. As for the sortie,  I had already given thought to  it.
Let us go down.'
Time  passed. At length watchers on the walls could  see the retreat of
the  out-companies. Small bands of weary  and  often wounded  men came first
with  little  order; some  were running wildly  as if  pursued. Away to  the
eastward the distant fires flickered; and  now it seemed that here and there
they crept across the plain. Houses and barns were burning.  Then from  many
points little  rivers of red flame  came  hurrying on,  winding through  the
gloom,  converging  towards  the line of  the broad  road that  led from the
City-gate to Osgiliath.
'The enemy,' men  murmured. 'The  dike is  down. Here they come pouring
through the  breaches! And they carry  torches,  it seems. Where are our own
folk?'
It drew now to evening by the hour, and  the light was so dim that even
far-sighted men upon the  Citadel could  discern little clearly out upon the
fields, save only the  burnings that ever multiplied, and the lines  of fire
that grew in length and speed.  At last, less than a mile  from  the City, a
more ordered mass of men came into view, marching not running, still holding
together.
The watchers held their breath. 'Faramir must be there,' they said. 'He
can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.'
Now  the  main retreat  was scarcely  two furlongs distant. Out of  the
gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that was  left of the
rearguard. Once again they turned at bay, facing the oncoming lines of fire.
Then  suddenly  there was a tumult of  fierce cries. Horsemen of  the  enemy
swept up. The lines of fire became flowing torrents,  file upon file of Orcs
bearing flames, and wild Southron men with red banners, shouting with  harsh
tongues, surging up, overtaking the retreat. And with a  piercing cry out of
the dim sky fell the winged shadows, the Nazgyl stooping to the kill.
The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, flying  wild
and witless here and there, flinging away their weapons, crying out in fear,
falling to the ground.
And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel, and Denethor at last released
the sortie. Drawn up  within  the shadow of the  Gate and under the  looming
walls outside they had waited for his signal: all the  mounted men that were
left in the City.  Now they  sprang forward, formed, quickened to  a gallop,
and charged with a great shout. And  from the walls an answering  shout went
