nightfall yesterday. As for the sortie,  I had already given thought to  it.
Let us go down.'
Time  passed. At length watchers on the walls could  see the retreat of
the  out-companies. Small bands of weary  and  often wounded  men came first
with  little  order; some  were running wildly  as if  pursued. Away to  the
eastward the distant fires flickered; and  now it seemed that here and there
they crept across the plain. Houses and barns were burning.  Then from  many
points little  rivers of red flame  came  hurrying on,  winding through  the
gloom,  converging  towards  the line of  the broad  road that  led from the
City-gate to Osgiliath.
'The enemy,' men  murmured. 'The  dike is  down. Here they come pouring
through the  breaches! And they carry  torches,  it seems. Where are our own
folk?'
It drew now to evening by the hour, and  the light was so dim that even
far-sighted men upon the  Citadel could  discern little clearly out upon the
fields, save only the  burnings that ever multiplied, and the lines  of fire
that grew in length and speed.  At last, less than a mile  from  the City, a
more ordered mass of men came into view, marching not running, still holding
together.
The watchers held their breath. 'Faramir must be there,' they said. 'He
can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.'
Now  the  main retreat  was scarcely  two furlongs distant. Out of  the
gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that was  left of the
rearguard. Once again they turned at bay, facing the oncoming lines of fire.
Then  suddenly  there was a tumult of  fierce cries. Horsemen of  the  enemy
swept up. The lines of fire became flowing torrents,  file upon file of Orcs
bearing flames, and wild Southron men with red banners, shouting with  harsh
tongues, surging up, overtaking the retreat. And with a  piercing cry out of
the dim sky fell the winged shadows, the Nazgyl stooping to the kill.
The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, flying  wild
and witless here and there, flinging away their weapons, crying out in fear,
falling to the ground.
And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel, and Denethor at last released
the sortie. Drawn up  within  the shadow of the  Gate and under the  looming
walls outside they had waited for his signal: all the  mounted men that were
left in the City.  Now they  sprang forward, formed, quickened to  a gallop,
and charged with a great shout. And  from the walls an answering  shout went
up; for foremost on the field rode the swan-knights of Dol Amroth with their
Prince and his blue banner at their head.
'Amroth for Gondor!' they cried. 'Amroth to Faramir!'
Like thunder they broke  upon the enemy on either flank of the retreat;
but  one rider outran  them  all, swift as the  wind in the grass: Shadowfax
bore him, shining,  unveiled  once  more, a light starting from his upraised
hand.
The Nazgyl screeched and swept away, for their Captain was not yet come
to challenge the  white fire of his foe. The hosts of Morgul intent on their
prey,  taken at  unawares in wild career, broke, scattering like sparks in a
gale. The out-companies with a great cheer turned and smote their  pursuers.
Hunters  became the hunted. The retreat  became  an onslaught. The field was
strewn with stricken orcs and  men, and a  reek arose of torches cast  away,
sputtering out in swirling smoke. The cavalry rode on.
But  Denethor  did not  permit them to  go  far.  Though the enemy  was
checked, and for the moment driven back, great forces  were flowing  in from
the East.  Again  the  trumpet rang,  sounding the retreat.  The cavalry  of
Gondor halted. Behind their screen the out-companies re-formed. Now steadily
they  came marching  back. They  reached the  Gate  of the City and entered,
stepping  proudly:  and  proudly the people of the  City looked  on them and
cried their praise, and  yet they were troubled in heart. For the  companies
were grievously reduced. Faramir had lost a third of his men. And  where was
he?
Last of all he came. His men passed in. The  mounted knights  returned,
and at their rear  the banner of Dol Amroth, and the Prince. And in his arms
before him on  his  horse  he bore  the body of his kinsman, Faramir  son of
Denethor, found upon the stricken field.
'Faramir! Faramir!' men cried, weeping in the  streets.  But he did not
answer, and they  bore him away up the winding  road to the Citadel  and his
father. Even  as the Nazgyl had swerved aside  from the  onset of  the White
Rider,  there came flying a deadly dart, and Faramir,  as he  held at bay  a
mounted champion of Harad, had  fallen to the earth.  Only the charge of Dol
Amroth had saved him from the red southland swords that would have hewed
him
as he lay.
The Prince Imrahil brought  Faramir to  the White Tower, and  he  said:
Your son has returned, lord, after  great deeds, and he told all that he had
seen. But Denethor rose  and looked on the face  of his  son and was silent.
Then he  bade  them make a bed  in the  chamber and lay Faramir  upon it and
depart. But  he himself went up alone into the  secret room under the summit
of the Tower; and many who looked  up thither  at that time saw a pale light
that gleamed and  flickered from the  narrow  windows for a while,  and then
flashed and  went  out. And when Denethor descended again he went to
Faramir
and sat beside him without speaking, but the face of the Lord was grey, more
deathlike than his son's.
So now at last the  City was besieged, enclosed in a ring  of foes. The
Rammas  was broken, and all the Pelennor  abandoned  to the Enemy.  The last
word  to  come  from outside the  walls  was  brought by men flying down the
northward road ere the  Gate was  shut. They were the remnant of  the  guard
that was kept  at that point where the way from Anurien and  Rohan  ran into
the townlands: Ingold led them, the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin
less than five days before,  while the sun still rose and there was hope  in
the morning.
'There is no  news of the Rohirrim,' he said. 'Rohan will not come now.
Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had  tidings  of
has come first, from over  the River by way of Andros, it is said.  They are
strong: battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and  countless companies of Men of  a
new sort that  we have not met before. Not tall, but broad and grim, bearded
like dwarves, wielding great axes. Out of some savage land in the  wide East
they come, we  deem. They hold  the northward road; and  many have passed
on
into Anurien. The Rohirrim cannot come.'
The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the  walls heard the rumour of
the enemy that roamed outside,  burning field  and tree, and  hewing any man
that they found abroad, living or  dead. The numbers that had already passed
over the River  could not be guessed  in the darkness, but when  morning, or
its  dim shadow,  stole over the plain, it was seen that  even fear by night
had  scarcely over-counted them.  The plain was  dark  with  their  marching
companies, and as far as eyes could strain in the  mirk there sprouted, like
a  foul fungus-growth, all about the beleaguered  city great camps of tents,
black or sombre red.
Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep trenches
in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as the trenches were
