dwindled  into  the  foggy night. Suddenly  Frodo laughed: from the  covered
basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising.
Chapter 5. A Conspiracy Unmasked
'Now we had  better get home  ourselves,' said Merry. There's something
funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.'
They turned down  the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept  and
edged with  large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards  or so  it brought
them to  the  river-bank,  where there was a broad wooden  landing-stage.  A
large  flat  ferry-boat was  moored beside it.  The white  bollards near the
water's edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts. Behind  them
the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before
them was dark,  with only  a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by
the bank. There seemed to be less fog on the further side.
Merry  led the pony  over a gangway  on to  the ferry,  and the  others
followed.  Merry  then  pushed slowly off with  a  long pole. The Brandywine
flowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and
up it a  winding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling
there. Behind loomed  up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds
of mist, shone many  round windows, yellow and red. They were the windows
of
Brandy Hall, the ancient home of the Brandybucks.
Long  ago Gorhendad Oldbuck,  head of the  Oldbuck family,  one of  the
oldest  in  the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed  the river, which
was the original  boundary of  the land  eastwards. He built (and excavated)
Brandy  Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck,  and settled  down  to  become
master of  what was virtually  a small independent country. His  family grew
and grew,  and after his days  continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied
the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,
and about a hundred windows. The  Brandybucks and  their numerous
dependants
then  began  to burrow, and later to  build,  all round about. That was  the
origin  of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old
Forest, a sort  of colony from the Shire. Its  chief village was Bucklebury,
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall.
The people in the Marish were  friendly with the Bucklanders,  and  the
authority of the Master  of the  Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck  family
was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock  and Rushey.
But  most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar,
half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter  of fact, they were not very
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point:
they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim.
Their land  was originally unprotected from the East; but on  that side
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been  planted many  generations
ago, and was now thick and  tail, for it  was constantly tended. It  ran all
the  way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop  curving away from the river,
to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle flowed  out  of  the Forest  into  the
Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to  end. But, of course, it was
not  a complete  protection.  The Forest  drew  close  to the hedge in  many
places.  The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after  dark,  and that also
was not usual in the Shire.
The  ferry-boat moved slowly  across the water. The Buckland shore drew
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his
old life lay behind  in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone
on living quietly at Bag End.
The four  hobbits stepped off the ferry.  Merry was  tying  it up,  and
Pippin  was already leading  the pony up the  path, when Sam  (who had  been
looking back, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper:
'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?'
On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just  make  out a
figure: it looked like a  dark black bundle left behind. But as they  looked
it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It
then crawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.
'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry.
'Something that is following us,' said Frodo. 'But don't ask  any  more
now!  Let's get away  at once!' They hurried up the path to the top  of  the
bank,  but when  they  looked  back  the far shore was shrouded in mist, and
nothing could be seen.
'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west-bank!' said Frodo.
'Can horses cross the river?'
'They  can go twenty miles north to Brandywine  Bridge - or they  might
swim,'  answered  Merry. 'Though  I  never heard of any horse  swimming  the
