seen. But Denethor rose  and looked on the face  of his  son and was silent.
Then he  bade  them make a bed  in the  chamber and lay Faramir  upon it and
depart. But  he himself went up alone into the  secret room under the summit
of the Tower; and many who looked  up thither  at that time saw a pale light
that gleamed and  flickered from the  narrow  windows for a while,  and then
flashed and  went  out. And when Denethor descended again he went to
Faramir
and sat beside him without speaking, but the face of the Lord was grey, more
deathlike than his son's.
So now at last the  City was besieged, enclosed in a ring  of foes. The
Rammas  was broken, and all the Pelennor  abandoned  to the Enemy.  The last
word  to  come  from outside the  walls  was  brought by men flying down the
northward road ere the  Gate was  shut. They were the remnant of  the  guard
that was kept  at that point where the way from Anurien and  Rohan  ran into
the townlands: Ingold led them, the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin
less than five days before,  while the sun still rose and there was hope  in
the morning.
'There is no  news of the Rohirrim,' he said. 'Rohan will not come now.
Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had  tidings  of
has come first, from over  the River by way of Andros, it is said.  They are
strong: battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and  countless companies of Men of  a
new sort that  we have not met before. Not tall, but broad and grim, bearded
like dwarves, wielding great axes. Out of some savage land in the  wide East
they come, we  deem. They hold  the northward road; and  many have passed
on
into Anurien. The Rohirrim cannot come.'
The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the  walls heard the rumour of
the enemy that roamed outside,  burning field  and tree, and  hewing any man
that they found abroad, living or  dead. The numbers that had already passed
over the River  could not be guessed  in the darkness, but when  morning, or
its  dim shadow,  stole over the plain, it was seen that  even fear by night
had  scarcely over-counted them.  The plain was  dark  with  their  marching
companies, and as far as eyes could strain in the  mirk there sprouted, like
a  foul fungus-growth, all about the beleaguered  city great camps of tents,
black or sombre red.
Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep trenches
in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as the trenches were
made each was filled with fire, though how it was  kindled or fed, by art or
devilry, none could see.  All day the labour  went forward, while the men of
Minas Tirith  looked  on, unable to hinder it. And as each  length of trench
was  completed,  they  could see great wains approaching; and soon yet  more
companies of the enemy were swiftly setting up, each behind  the cover of  a
trench, great engines for the casting of missiles. There were  none upon the
City walls large enough to reach so far or to stay the work.
At  first  men laughed and did  not greatly fear  such devices. For the
main  wall of  the City was of great height and  marvellous thickness, built
ere the power and craft of N®menor waned in exile; and its outward  face was
like  to the Tower  of  Orthanc,  hard and dark and smooth, unconquerable by
steel or  fire, unbreakable except  by some  convulsion that would rend  the
very earth on which it stood.
'Nay,'  they said,  'not if  the Nameless One himself should come,  not
even he could enter here while  we yet live.'  But some answered: 'While  we
yet live? How long? He has  a weapon that has brought low many strong places
since the world began. Hunger. The roads are cut. Rohan will not come.'
But the engines did not waste shot upon the indomitable wall. It was no
brigand or orc-chieftain that ordered the assault upon the Lord  of Mordor's
greatest  foe. A  power and mind of malice guided  it. As soon as  the great
catapults were set, with many yells and the creaking of rope and winch, they
began to throw  missiles marvellously high, so that they passed  right above
the  battlement and fell thudding  within the first circle of  the City; and
many of them by some secret art burst into flame as they came toppling down.
Soon there  was great peril of fire behind the wall,  and all who could
be spared  were busy quelling the flames that sprang up in many places. Then
among the greater casts  there  fell  another hail, less  ruinous  but  more
horrible. All about the streets and lanes behind the Gate  it tumbled  down,
small round shot that did not burn. But when men ran  to learn what it might
be, they cried aloud or wept.  For the enemy was flinging into  the City all
the heads of  those who had  fallen fighting at Osgiliath, or on the Rammas,
or  in the fields. They were grim to look on; for though some  were  crushed
and shapeless, and some had  been cruelly hewn, yet  many had  features that
could be told,  and  it  seemed that  they  had  died in pain;  and all were
branded with  the foul token of the Lidless Eye. But marred  and dishonoured
as  they were, it often chanced  that thus a man would see again the face of
someone  that he had known, who had  walked proudly once in arms,  or tilled
the fields, or ridden in upon a holiday from the green vales in the hills.
In vain men shook  their fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before
the Gate. Curses they heeded not, nor understood the tongues of western men;
crying with harsh voices like beasts and  carrion-birds. But soon there were
few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to stand up and defy the hosts of
Mordor.  For yet another weapon, swifter than hunger,  the Lord of the  Dark
Tower had: dread and despair.
The Nazgyl came again, and  as  their  Dark Lord now grew and put forth
his strength, so their voices, which uttered only his  will and  his malice,
were filled with  evil and  horror. Ever they circled  above the  City, like
vultures that expect their fill of doomed men's flesh. Out of sight and shot
they  flew, and yet were ever present, and their deadly voices rent the air.
More unbearable they became, not  less, at each new cry.  At length even the
stout-hearted would  fling  themselves to the  ground as the  hidden  menace
passed  over  them,  or they would  stand, letting  their  weapons fall from
nerveless hands while into their minds a blackness came, and they thought no
more of war, but only of hiding and of crawling, and of death.
During all this black day Faramir  lay  upon his bed  in the chamber of
the White Tower, wandering  in  a  desperate fever; dying someone  said, and
soon  'dying' all men were saying upon  the walls and in the streets. And by
him his father sat, and said nothing, but watched, and gave  no  longer  any
heed to the defence.
No  hours  so dark had  Pippin known, not  even in the clutches  of the
Uruk-hai. It was  his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, forgotten
it seemed, standing by  the  door of the unlit  chamber, mastering  his  own
fears as best he could. And as  he  watched, it seemed to him that  Denethor
grew old before his eyes, as if something had snapped in his proud will, and
his stern mind was  overthrown. Grief maybe had wrought it, and  remorse. He
saw tears on that once tearless face, more unbearable than wrath.
'Do not weep, lord,' he stammered. 'Perhaps he will get well. Have  you
asked Gandalf?'
'Comfort me  not  with wizards!' said Denethor.  'The  fool's  hope has
failed.  The Enemy has  found it, and now his power waxes; he sees  our very
thoughts, and all we do is ruinous.
'I sent my  son forth,  unthanked, unblessed, out  into needless peril,
and here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may now betide
in war, my line too is  ending, even the House  of the Stewards  has failed.
