the fields, or ridden in upon a holiday from the green vales in the hills.
In vain men shook  their fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before
the Gate. Curses they heeded not, nor understood the tongues of western men;
crying with harsh voices like beasts and  carrion-birds. But soon there were
few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to stand up and defy the hosts of
Mordor.  For yet another weapon, swifter than hunger,  the Lord of the  Dark
Tower had: dread and despair.
The Nazgyl came again, and  as  their  Dark Lord now grew and put forth
his strength, so their voices, which uttered only his  will and  his malice,
were filled with  evil and  horror. Ever they circled  above the  City, like
vultures that expect their fill of doomed men's flesh. Out of sight and shot
they  flew, and yet were ever present, and their deadly voices rent the air.
More unbearable they became, not  less, at each new cry.  At length even the
stout-hearted would  fling  themselves to the  ground as the  hidden  menace
passed  over  them,  or they would  stand, letting  their  weapons fall from
nerveless hands while into their minds a blackness came, and they thought no
more of war, but only of hiding and of crawling, and of death.
During all this black day Faramir  lay  upon his bed  in the chamber of
the White Tower, wandering  in  a  desperate fever; dying someone  said, and
soon  'dying' all men were saying upon  the walls and in the streets. And by
him his father sat, and said nothing, but watched, and gave  no  longer  any
heed to the defence.
No  hours  so dark had  Pippin known, not  even in the clutches  of the
Uruk-hai. It was  his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, forgotten
it seemed, standing by  the  door of the unlit  chamber, mastering  his  own
fears as best he could. And as  he  watched, it seemed to him that  Denethor
grew old before his eyes, as if something had snapped in his proud will, and
his stern mind was  overthrown. Grief maybe had wrought it, and  remorse. He
saw tears on that once tearless face, more unbearable than wrath.
'Do not weep, lord,' he stammered. 'Perhaps he will get well. Have  you
asked Gandalf?'
'Comfort me  not  with wizards!' said Denethor.  'The  fool's  hope has
failed.  The Enemy has  found it, and now his power waxes; he sees  our very
thoughts, and all we do is ruinous.
'I sent my  son forth,  unthanked, unblessed, out  into needless peril,
and here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may now betide
in war, my line too is  ending, even the House  of the Stewards  has failed.
Mean  folk shall rule  the last remnant of the Kings of Men, lurking in  the
hills until all are hounded out.'
Men came to the  door crying for the Lord of the City. 'Nay, I will not
come down,' he said. 'I must stay beside my son. He might still speak before
the end. But that is near. Follow whom you will,  even the Grey Fool, though
his hope has failed. Here I stay.'
So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the City  of
Gondor.  Wherever he came  men's  hearts would  lift  again,  and the winged
shadows pass from memory. Tirelessly he strode  from Citadel to  Gate,  from
north to south about the wall; and with him went the Prince of Dol Amroth in
his shining mail. For he and his knights still held themselves like lords in
whom the race  of N®menor  ran  true. Men that  saw them  whispered  saying:
'Belike the old tales speak well; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that
folk, for the people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago.' And then
one would sing amid the gloom  some staves of the Lay of Nimrodel, or  other
songs of the Vale of Anduin out of vanished years.
And  yet - when they had  gone, the shadows closed  on  men  again, and
their hearts  went cold, and the valour of Gondor  withered into ash. And so
slowly  they passed out of  a  dim  day  of  fears  into  the darkness of  a
desperate night. Fires  now raged unchecked in the first circle of the City,
and the garrison upon the outer wall was already in many places cut off from
retreat.  But the  faithful who remained there at their posts were few; most
had fled beyond the second gate.
Far behind the  battle the  River had been swiftly bridged, and all day
more  force  and  gear of  war had poured across. Now at last  in the middle
night  the  assault was loosed. The vanguard  passed through the trenches of
fire by many devious paths that had been  left between  them. On  they came,
reckless of their loss as they  approached, still bunched and herded, within
the  range of  bowmen on the  wall. But indeed  there were too few  now left
there to do them great damage, though the  light of the fires showed up many
a mark for archers of such skill as Gondor once had boasted. Then perceiving
that the valour of the City was already beaten down, the  hidden Captain put
forth his strength. Slowly the great siege-towers  built in Osgiliath rolled
forward through the dark.
Messengers came again to the chamber in the White Tower, and Pippin let
them enter,  for  they were  urgent. Denethor  turned  his head slowly  from
Faramir's face, and looked at them silently.
'The first circle of  the City is burning, lord,'  they said. 'What are
your  commands?  You are  still  the  Lord and Steward.  Not all will follow
Mithrandir. Men are flying from the walls and leaving them unmanned.'
'Why? Why do the fools fly?' said Denethor. 'Better to burn sooner than
late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to  my
pyre. To my  pyre! No tomb for Denethor  and Faramir. No tomb! No  long
slow
sleep of death embalmed. We will burn like heathen kings before  ever a ship
sailed hither from the West. The West has failed. Go back and burn!'
The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled.
Now Denethor  stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir that he
had held. 'He is burning, already burning,' he said sadly. 'The house of his
spirit crumbles.' Then stepping softly towards Pippin he looked down at him.
'Farewell!' he said. 'Farewell, Peregrin  son of Paladin!  Your service
has  been short,  and now  it is drawing to an end.  I release you from  the
little that remains. Go now, and die in what way seems best to you. And with
whom you will, even that friend whose  folly brought you to this death. Send
for my servants and then go. Farewell!'
'I will  not say  farewell, my  lord,' said  Pippin kneeling.  And then
suddenly  hobbit-like  once more, he stood up  and looked the old man in the
eyes. 'I will  take your leave, sir,' he said;  'for  I want to  see Gandalf
very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will  not think of dying until he
despairs of life.  But  from my word  and your service I do  not  wish to be
released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel,  I hope to
be here and stand beside you and earn  perhaps the arms that you have  given
me.'
'Do as  you  will,  Master  Halfling,' said Denethor.  'But  my life is
broken. Send for my servants!' He turned back to Faramir.
Pippin left him and called for the servants, and they came: six  men of
the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled  at the summons. But in  a
quiet voice  Denethor bade them lay warm coverlets on Faramir's bed and take
it up. And they  did  so, and  lifting  up the  bed  they  bore it from  the
chamber. Slowly they paced to trouble the fevered man as little as might be,
and Denethor, now bending on a staff, followed them; and last came Pippin.
Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral,  out into the
darkness,  where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flickers of dull
red.  Softly they paced the  great  courtyard,  and  at a word from Denethor
