'The first circle of  the City is burning, lord,'  they said. 'What are
your  commands?  You are  still  the  Lord and Steward.  Not all will follow
Mithrandir. Men are flying from the walls and leaving them unmanned.'
'Why? Why do the fools fly?' said Denethor. 'Better to burn sooner than
late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to  my
pyre. To my  pyre! No tomb for Denethor  and Faramir. No tomb! No  long
slow
sleep of death embalmed. We will burn like heathen kings before  ever a ship
sailed hither from the West. The West has failed. Go back and burn!'
The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled.
Now Denethor  stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir that he
had held. 'He is burning, already burning,' he said sadly. 'The house of his
spirit crumbles.' Then stepping softly towards Pippin he looked down at him.
'Farewell!' he said. 'Farewell, Peregrin  son of Paladin!  Your service
has  been short,  and now  it is drawing to an end.  I release you from  the
little that remains. Go now, and die in what way seems best to you. And with
whom you will, even that friend whose  folly brought you to this death. Send
for my servants and then go. Farewell!'
'I will  not say  farewell, my  lord,' said  Pippin kneeling.  And then
suddenly  hobbit-like  once more, he stood up  and looked the old man in the
eyes. 'I will  take your leave, sir,' he said;  'for  I want to  see Gandalf
very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will  not think of dying until he
despairs of life.  But  from my word  and your service I do  not  wish to be
released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel,  I hope to
be here and stand beside you and earn  perhaps the arms that you have  given
me.'
'Do as  you  will,  Master  Halfling,' said Denethor.  'But  my life is
broken. Send for my servants!' He turned back to Faramir.
Pippin left him and called for the servants, and they came: six  men of
the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled  at the summons. But in  a
quiet voice  Denethor bade them lay warm coverlets on Faramir's bed and take
it up. And they  did  so, and  lifting  up the  bed  they  bore it from  the
chamber. Slowly they paced to trouble the fevered man as little as might be,
and Denethor, now bending on a staff, followed them; and last came Pippin.
Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral,  out into the
darkness,  where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flickers of dull
red.  Softly they paced the  great  courtyard,  and  at a word from Denethor
halted beside the Withered Tree.
All was silent, save for the rumour of war in the City down  below, and
they heard the  water  dripping sadly  from  the dead branches into the dark
pool. Then they went on through the Citadel gate, where the  sentinel stared
at  them in wonder and dismay as they passed by.  Turning westward they came
at length to  a door in the rearward wall of the sixth circle. Fen Hollen it
was called, for it was kept ever shut save at times of funeral, and only the
Lord of  the  City might use that  way, or those who  bore the token of  the
tombs and tended the houses of the  dead. Beyond it went a winding road that
descended in  many curves down  to the  narrow  land  under  the  shadow  of
Mindolluin's  precipice  where stood the mansions of the dead Kings  and  of
their Stewards.
A porter  sat in a  little house beside  the way,  and with fear in his
eyes he came  forth bearing  a lantern in his hand. At the Lord's command he
unlocked the door, and  silently it  swung  back; and  they passed  through,
taking  the lantern from his  hand. It was dark on the climbing road between
ancient  walls  and   many-pillared   balusters   looming  in  the   swaying
lantern-beam. Their  slow feet echoed as  they walked down,  down, until  at
last they came to  the Silent Street,  Rath  Dnnen, between  pale  domes and
empty halls and images of men long dead;  and they entered into the House of
the Stewards and set down their burden.
There  Pippin,  staring uneasily about  him, saw that he was in  a wide
vaulted chamber,  draped as it  were with the great shadows that  the little
lantern threw upon its shrouded  walls. And dimly to  be seen were many rows
of tables, carved of marble;  and upon each table lay a sleeping form, hands
folded, head pillowed upon stone. But one table near at hand stood broad and
bare. Upon it at a sign from Denethor they laid Faramir  and his father side
by side, and covered them with one covering, and stood then with bowed heads
as mourners beside a bed of death. Then Denethor spoke in a low voice.
'Here we will wait,' he said. 'But send not for the embalmers. Bring us
wood quick to  burn, and lay it all about us, and beneath; and pour oil upon
it. And when I bid you thrust in  a torch. Do this and speak no more to  me.
Farewell!'
'By your leave, lord!' said Pippin and turned and fled  in terror  from
the  deathly house. 'Poor Faramir!' he thought.  'I must find Gandalf.  Poor
Faramir!  Quite likely he needs medicine  more than  tears.  Oh, where can I
find Gandalf? In the thick of things, I suppose; and he will have no time to
spare for dying men or madmen.'
At the door he turned to one  of the servants who had remained on guard
there.  'Your master is not himself,' he  said. 'Go slow! Bring  no fire  to
this place while Faramir lives! Do nothing until Gandalf comes!'
'Who is  the  master  of  Minas  Tirith?' the  man  answered. 'The Lord
Denethor or the Grey Wanderer?'
'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,' said Pippin, and he  sped
back and up the winding way as swiftly as his feet would carry him, past the
astonished porter, out through  the door, and on, till he came near the gate
of the Citadel. The sentinel hailed him as he went by, and he recognized the
voice of Beregond.
'Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?' he cried.
'To find Mithrandir,' Pippin answered.
'The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me,'  said
Beregond; 'but tell  me quickly, if you may:  what goes forward? Whither has
my  Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but I  heard that he passed towards
the Closed Door, and men were bearing Faramir before him.'
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'to the Silent Street.'
Beregond bowed his  head  to  hide his tears.  'They said that  he  was
dying,' he sighed, 'and now he is dead.'
'No,' said Pippin, 'not yet. And even now his death might be prevented,
I think. But the Lord of  the City, Beregond,  has fallen before his city is
taken. He is fey and dangerous.' Quickly he told of Denethor's strange words
and deeds. 'I must find Gandalf at once.'
'Then you must go down to the battle.'
'I  know. The Lord has given me  leave. But,  Beregond, if you can,  do
something to stop any dreadful thing happening.'
'The Lord  does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave
their post for any cause, save at his own command.'
'Well,  you  must  choose between orders and the life of Faramir,' said
Pippin.  'And as for orders,  I think you  have a madman to deal with, not a
lord. I must run. I will return if I can.'
He ran on,  down, down towards the outer city. Men flying back from the
burning passed him, and some  seeing his livery turned  and shouted, but  he
paid no heed. At last he was through  the Second Gate,  beyond  which  great
fires  leaped up between the walls. Yet it seemed strangely silent. No noise
or shouts of battle or din of arms could be heard. Then suddenly there was a
