spare for dying men or madmen.'
At the door he turned to one  of the servants who had remained on guard
there.  'Your master is not himself,' he  said. 'Go slow! Bring  no fire  to
this place while Faramir lives! Do nothing until Gandalf comes!'
'Who is  the  master  of  Minas  Tirith?' the  man  answered. 'The Lord
Denethor or the Grey Wanderer?'
'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,' said Pippin, and he  sped
back and up the winding way as swiftly as his feet would carry him, past the
astonished porter, out through  the door, and on, till he came near the gate
of the Citadel. The sentinel hailed him as he went by, and he recognized the
voice of Beregond.
'Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?' he cried.
'To find Mithrandir,' Pippin answered.
'The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me,'  said
Beregond; 'but tell  me quickly, if you may:  what goes forward? Whither has
my  Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but I  heard that he passed towards
the Closed Door, and men were bearing Faramir before him.'
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'to the Silent Street.'
Beregond bowed his  head  to  hide his tears.  'They said that  he  was
dying,' he sighed, 'and now he is dead.'
'No,' said Pippin, 'not yet. And even now his death might be prevented,
I think. But the Lord of  the City, Beregond,  has fallen before his city is
taken. He is fey and dangerous.' Quickly he told of Denethor's strange words
and deeds. 'I must find Gandalf at once.'
'Then you must go down to the battle.'
'I  know. The Lord has given me  leave. But,  Beregond, if you can,  do
something to stop any dreadful thing happening.'
'The Lord  does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave
their post for any cause, save at his own command.'
'Well,  you  must  choose between orders and the life of Faramir,' said
Pippin.  'And as for orders,  I think you  have a madman to deal with, not a
lord. I must run. I will return if I can.'
He ran on,  down, down towards the outer city. Men flying back from the
burning passed him, and some  seeing his livery turned  and shouted, but  he
paid no heed. At last he was through  the Second Gate,  beyond  which  great
fires  leaped up between the walls. Yet it seemed strangely silent. No noise
or shouts of battle or din of arms could be heard. Then suddenly there was a
dreadful cry and a great shock,  and a deep echoing boom. Forcing himself on
against a gust of fear and horror that shook him almost to his knees. Pippin
turned a  corner opening on the wide place behind  the City Gate. He stopped
dead. He had found Gandalf; but he shrank back, cowering into a shadow.
Ever since the middle  night the  great assault had gone  on. The drums
rolled. To the  north and to the  south company upon company  of  the  enemy
pressed to the walls. There came great beasts, like moving houses in the red
and fitful light, the    mymakil     of  the Harad dragging through the lanes  amid
the fires huge towers and engines. Yet their Captain cared not  greatly what
they  did or how many might be slain:  their purpose was  only to  test  the
strength of the defence and to  keep the men  of Gondor busy in many places.
It was against the Gate that he would throw his heaviest weight. Very strong
it might be, wrought of steel and iron, and guarded with towers and bastions
of indomitable stone, yet it was the key, the weakest point in all that high
and impenetrable wall.
The drums  rolled louder. Fires leaped up. Great engines crawled across
the field; and in the midst was a huge ram, great as a forest-tree a hundred
feet in length,  swinging on mighty chains. Long had  it been forging in the
dark smithies  of Mordor, and  its hideous head, founded of black steel, was
shaped in  the likeness of a ravening wolf; on it spells of  ruin lay. Grond
they named it,  in memory of  the Hammer of the  Underworld  of  old.  Great
beasts drew it,  Orcs surrounded  it, and  behind  walked mountain-trolls to
wield it.
But about the Gate resistance still was stout, and there the knights of
Dol Amroth and the hardiest of the garrison stood at bay. Shot and dart fell
thick; siege-towers crashed or blazed  suddenly like torches. All before the
walls on either side of the Gate the  ground was choked  with wreck and with
bodies of the slain; yet still driven as by a madness more and more came up.
Grond crawled on. Upon  its housing no fire would catch; and though now
and again some great beast that  hauled it would go  mad and spread stamping
ruin among  the  orcs  innumerable  that guarded  it, their bodies were cast
aside from its path and others took their place.
Grond crawled on. The drums  rolled wildly. Over the  hills of slain  a
hideous shape appeared: a horseman, tall,  hooded, cloaked in black. Slowly,
trampling the fallen,  he rode forth, heeding no  longer any dart. He halted
and held up  a long pale sword. And as he did so a great  fear  fell on all,
defender  and foe alike; and the hands of men drooped to their sides, and no
bow sang. For a moment all was still.
The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward
by  huge hands. It reached the Gate. It  swung. A  deep boom rumbled through
the City like thunder running in the clouds. But the doors of iron and posts
of steel withstood the stroke.
Then  the  Black Captain rose  in  his  stirrups and  cried  aloud in a
dreadful voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and  terror
to rend both heart and stone.
Thrice he cried.  Thrice  the great ram boomed.  And suddenly  upon the
last  stroke the Gate of Gondor broke. As if stricken by some blasting spell
it burst asunder:  there  was  a flash of searing  lightning, and the  doors
tumbled in riven fragments to the ground.
In rode the Lord  of the Nazgyl. A great black  shape against the fires
beyond he loomed up, grown  to a vast menace of despair. In rode the Lord of
the Nazgyl, under  the  archway that no  enemy ever yet had  passed, and all
fled before his face.
All save one. There waiting,  silent and still in the  space before the
Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone  among the free
horses
of  the earth endured the terror, unmoving,  steadfast as  a graven image in
Rath Dnnen.
'You  cannot enter here,' said Gandalf, and the huge shadow halted. 'Go
back to the abyss prepared  for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that
awaits you and your Master. Go!'
The Black Rider flung back his hood, and behold! he had a kingly crown;
and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red fires  shone between it and
the mantled shoulders vast and dark. From a mouth unseen there came a deadly
laughter.
'Old fool!' he  said. 'Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know Death
when you see it? Die  now and curse in vain!' And  with that he lifted  high
his sword and flames ran down the blade.
Gandalf did  not move.  And in that  very moment,  away  behind in some
courtyard  of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear  he crowed,  recking
nothing of wizardry or war, welcoming  only  the morning that in the sky far
above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn.
And  as  if in  answer there  came from far away  another note.  Horns,
horns, horns. In dark Mindolluin's sides  they dimly  echoed. Great horns of
