bow sang. For a moment all was still.
The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward
by  huge hands. It reached the Gate. It  swung. A  deep boom rumbled through
the City like thunder running in the clouds. But the doors of iron and posts
of steel withstood the stroke.
Then  the  Black Captain rose  in  his  stirrups and  cried  aloud in a
dreadful voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and  terror
to rend both heart and stone.
Thrice he cried.  Thrice  the great ram boomed.  And suddenly  upon the
last  stroke the Gate of Gondor broke. As if stricken by some blasting spell
it burst asunder:  there  was  a flash of searing  lightning, and the  doors
tumbled in riven fragments to the ground.
In rode the Lord  of the Nazgyl. A great black  shape against the fires
beyond he loomed up, grown  to a vast menace of despair. In rode the Lord of
the Nazgyl, under  the  archway that no  enemy ever yet had  passed, and all
fled before his face.
All save one. There waiting,  silent and still in the  space before the
Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone  among the free
horses
of  the earth endured the terror, unmoving,  steadfast as  a graven image in
Rath Dnnen.
'You  cannot enter here,' said Gandalf, and the huge shadow halted. 'Go
back to the abyss prepared  for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that
awaits you and your Master. Go!'
The Black Rider flung back his hood, and behold! he had a kingly crown;
and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red fires  shone between it and
the mantled shoulders vast and dark. From a mouth unseen there came a deadly
laughter.
'Old fool!' he  said. 'Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know Death
when you see it? Die  now and curse in vain!' And  with that he lifted  high
his sword and flames ran down the blade.
Gandalf did  not move.  And in that  very moment,  away  behind in some
courtyard  of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear  he crowed,  recking
nothing of wizardry or war, welcoming  only  the morning that in the sky far
above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn.
And  as  if in  answer there  came from far away  another note.  Horns,
horns, horns. In dark Mindolluin's sides  they dimly  echoed. Great horns of
the North wildly blowing. Rohan had come at last.
Chapter 5. The Ride of the Rohirrim
It was dark and Merry could see  nothing as he lay on the ground rolled
in a blanket; yet  though the night was airless and windless, all  about him
hidden  trees were sighing  softly. He lifted  his  head.  Then he heard  it
again: a  sound like faint drums in the wooded hills and mountain-steps. The
throb would cease suddenly and then be taken up again  at some other  point,
now nearer, now further off. He wondered if the watchmen had heard it.
He  could not see  them,  but he  knew  that  all  round  him were  the
companies of the Rohirrim. He could smell the horses in  the dark, and could
hear their shiftings  and their soft stamping on  the needle-covered ground.
The host  was bivouacked in  the  pine-woods that  clustered about  Eilenach
Beacon, a tall  hill standing up from  the long ridges of the Dr®adan Forest
that lay beside the great road in East Anurien.
Tired as he was Merry could not sleep. He had ridden now  for four days
on end,  and the ever-deepening gloom had slowly  weighed down his heart. He
began to wonder  why he had been so  eager to come,  when he had  been given
every excuse, even his lord's command, to  stay behind. He wondered, too, if
the  old  King knew  that he had been disobeyed and  was angry. Perhaps not.
There seemed  to be  some understanding  between Dernhelm  and Elfhelm,
the
Marshal  who commanded  the             jored   in which they were riding. He and all  his
men ignored Merry and  pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been
just  another bag that  Dernhelm was  carrying. Dernhelm was  no comfort: he
never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and  lonely. Now the time
was anxious, and  the host was in peril.  They were less than a  day's  ride
from the out-walls of Minas Tirith  that encircled the townlands. Scouts had
been sent ahead. Some  had not returned.  Others hastening back had reported
that the  road was  held in  force against  them.  A  host  of the enemy was
encamped upon it, three miles west of Amon Don, and some strength of men
was
already  thrusting along the road  and was no more than three  leagues away.
Orcs were roving in  the hills  and  woods along the  roadside. The king and
Jomer held council in the watches of the night.
Merry  wanted somebody to  talk to, and he thought of Pippin.  But that
