Chapter 5. The Ride of the Rohirrim
It was dark and Merry could see  nothing as he lay on the ground rolled
in a blanket; yet  though the night was airless and windless, all  about him
hidden  trees were sighing  softly. He lifted  his  head.  Then he heard  it
again: a  sound like faint drums in the wooded hills and mountain-steps. The
throb would cease suddenly and then be taken up again  at some other  point,
now nearer, now further off. He wondered if the watchmen had heard it.
He  could not see  them,  but he  knew  that  all  round  him were  the
companies of the Rohirrim. He could smell the horses in  the dark, and could
hear their shiftings  and their soft stamping on  the needle-covered ground.
The host  was bivouacked in  the  pine-woods that  clustered about  Eilenach
Beacon, a tall  hill standing up from  the long ridges of the Dr®adan Forest
that lay beside the great road in East Anurien.
Tired as he was Merry could not sleep. He had ridden now  for four days
on end,  and the ever-deepening gloom had slowly  weighed down his heart. He
began to wonder  why he had been so  eager to come,  when he had  been given
every excuse, even his lord's command, to  stay behind. He wondered, too, if
the  old  King knew  that he had been disobeyed and  was angry. Perhaps not.
There seemed  to be  some understanding  between Dernhelm  and Elfhelm,
the
Marshal  who commanded  the             jored   in which they were riding. He and all  his
men ignored Merry and  pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been
just  another bag that  Dernhelm was  carrying. Dernhelm was  no comfort: he
never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and  lonely. Now the time
was anxious, and  the host was in peril.  They were less than a  day's  ride
from the out-walls of Minas Tirith  that encircled the townlands. Scouts had
been sent ahead. Some  had not returned.  Others hastening back had reported
that the  road was  held in  force against  them.  A  host  of the enemy was
encamped upon it, three miles west of Amon Don, and some strength of men
was
already  thrusting along the road  and was no more than three  leagues away.
Orcs were roving in  the hills  and  woods along the  roadside. The king and
Jomer held council in the watches of the night.
Merry  wanted somebody to  talk to, and he thought of Pippin.  But that
only increased his  restlessness. Poor Pippin, shut up in the great city  of
stone,  lonely and  afraid. Merry wished he was a tall Rider  like Jomer and
could  blow  a horn or something and go galloping to his rescue.  He sat up,
listening  to the  drums  that  were  beating again,  now  nearer  at  hand.
Presently  he  heard  voices  speaking  low, and  he  saw  dim half-shrouded
lanterns passing  through the trees. Men nearby began to move uncertainly in
the dark.
A tall figure loomed up and stumbled over  him, cursing the tree-roots.
He recognized the voice of the Marshal, Elfhelm.
'I am not a tree-root, Sir,' he said, 'nor a bag, but a bruised hobbit.
The least you can do in amends is to tell me what is afoot.'
'Anything that  can keep so  in this  devil's mirk,' answered  Elfhelm.
'But my lord sends word that we must  set ourselves in readiness: orders may
come for a sudden move.'
'Is  the enemy coming then?' asked Merry  anxiously.  'Are those  their
drums? I began to think I was  imagining them, as no one else seemed to take
any notice of them.'
'Nay, nay,' said  Elfhelm, 'the enemy  is on the road not in the hills.
You hear the Woses, the Wild Men of the Woods: thus they talk together  from
afar. They still haunt Dr®adan Forest, it is said. Remnants of an older time
they be, living few and  secretly, wild and wary as the beasts. They go  not
to war with Gondor or  the Mark; but  now they  are troubled by the darkness
and the  coming of the orcs:  they fear lest the Dark Years be returning, as
seems  likely enough.  Let us be thankful that they are  not hunting us: for
they use poisoned  arrows,  it is  said,  and  they  are  woodcrafty  beyond
compare. But  they have offered their services to  Thjoden. Even now one  of
their headmen is being taken to  the king. Yonder  go the lights.  So much I
have heard but no more. And now I must busy myself with my  lord's
commands.
Pack yourself up, Master Bag!' He vanished into the shadows.
Merry did not like this talk of wild men  and poisoned darts, but quite
apart from that a great weight of dread  was on him. Waiting was unbearable.
He  longed to know  what was going to happen. He got up and soon was
walking
warily in pursuit of the last lantern before it disappeared among the trees.
Presently he came to an open  space  where a small tent had been set up
for the king under a great tree. A large lantern, covered above, was hanging
from a bough and cast  a  pale circle of  light below. There sat Thjoden and
Jomer, and before  them  on the ground sat a strange  squat shape of a  man,
gnarled as an old  stone, and the hairs of his scanty beard straggled on his
lumpy chin like  dry  moss.  He was  short-legged and fat-armed,  thick  and
stumpy, and  clad only  with grass about his waist. Merry  felt that he  had
seen  him  before  somewhere, and suddenly  he remembered  the  P®kel-men
of
Dunharrow. Here  was one of those old  images  brought to life, or  maybe  a
creature descended  in true line through endless years from the models  used
by the forgotten craftsmen long ago.
There was  a silence as Merry crept nearer, and then the Wild Man began
to speak, in answer to some  question, it  seemed.  His  voice  was deep and
guttural,  yet to Merry's  surprise he spoke  the Common Speech, though in a
halting fashion, and uncouth words were mingled with it.
'No, father of  Horse-men,' he  said,  'we fight not. Hunt  only.  Kill
gorgyn    in woods, hate orc-folk. You hate           gorgyn    too. We help as we can. Wild
Men have long ears and long eyes; know all  paths. Wild Men live here before
Stone-houses; before Tall Men come up out of Water.'
'But our need is for aid in battle,' said Jomer. 'How will you and your
folk help us?'
'Bring news,' said  the Wild Man. 'We look out from hills. We climb big
mountain  and look down.  Stone-city is shut. Fire burns there  outside; now
inside too. You  wish to come there? Then you must be  quick. But                      gorgyn    and
men out  of  far-away,'  he waved a  short gnarled  arm  eastward,  'sit  on
horse-road. Very many, more than Horse-men.'
'How do you know that?' said Jomer.
The old man's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was
sullen  with displeasure.  'Wild  men are wild, free, but not  children,' he
answered. 'I am great headman, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn. I count many things: stars in
sky, leaves  on trees, men in  the dark. You have a score of scores  counted
ten  times and five. They  have more.  Big fight, and who will win? And many
more walk round walls of Stone-houses.'
'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,' said  Thjoden. 'And our scouts  say
that they have  cast trenches  and  stakes across the road.  We cannot sweep
them away in sudden onset.'
'And yet we need great haste,' said Jomer. 'Mundburg is on fire!'
'Let Ghvn-buri-Ghvn finish!' said the Wild Man. 'More than one road  he
