from a bough and cast  a  pale circle of  light below. There sat Thjoden and
Jomer, and before  them  on the ground sat a strange  squat shape of a  man,
gnarled as an old  stone, and the hairs of his scanty beard straggled on his
lumpy chin like  dry  moss.  He was  short-legged and fat-armed,  thick  and
stumpy, and  clad only  with grass about his waist. Merry  felt that he  had
seen  him  before  somewhere, and suddenly  he remembered  the  P®kel-men
of
Dunharrow. Here  was one of those old  images  brought to life, or  maybe  a
creature descended  in true line through endless years from the models  used
by the forgotten craftsmen long ago.
There was  a silence as Merry crept nearer, and then the Wild Man began
to speak, in answer to some  question, it  seemed.  His  voice  was deep and
guttural,  yet to Merry's  surprise he spoke  the Common Speech, though in a
halting fashion, and uncouth words were mingled with it.
'No, father of  Horse-men,' he  said,  'we fight not. Hunt  only.  Kill
gorgyn    in woods, hate orc-folk. You hate           gorgyn    too. We help as we can. Wild
Men have long ears and long eyes; know all  paths. Wild Men live here before
Stone-houses; before Tall Men come up out of Water.'
'But our need is for aid in battle,' said Jomer. 'How will you and your
folk help us?'
'Bring news,' said  the Wild Man. 'We look out from hills. We climb big
mountain  and look down.  Stone-city is shut. Fire burns there  outside; now
inside too. You  wish to come there? Then you must be  quick. But                      gorgyn    and
men out  of  far-away,'  he waved a  short gnarled  arm  eastward,  'sit  on
horse-road. Very many, more than Horse-men.'
'How do you know that?' said Jomer.
The old man's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was
sullen  with displeasure.  'Wild  men are wild, free, but not  children,' he
answered. 'I am great headman, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn. I count many things: stars in
sky, leaves  on trees, men in  the dark. You have a score of scores  counted
ten  times and five. They  have more.  Big fight, and who will win? And many
more walk round walls of Stone-houses.'
'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,' said  Thjoden. 'And our scouts  say
that they have  cast trenches  and  stakes across the road.  We cannot sweep
them away in sudden onset.'
'And yet we need great haste,' said Jomer. 'Mundburg is on fire!'
'Let Ghvn-buri-Ghvn finish!' said the Wild Man. 'More than one road  he
knows. He will lead you by road where no pits are, no                 gorgyn    walk, only Wild
Men  and  beasts. Many paths were  made  when Stonehouse-folk were
stronger.
They carved  hills as  hunters carve beast-flesh.  Wild  Men  think they ate
stone for food. They  went through Dr®adan  to Rimmon with great wains.
They
go  no longer. Road is forgotten, but not by Wild  Men. Over hill and behind
hill it  lies still  under grass and tree, there behind Rimmon  and down  to
Don, and back at the  end to  Horse-men's road. Wild Men will show  you that
road. Then you will kill       gorgyn     and drive away bad dark  with  bright iron,
and Wild Men can go back to sleep in the wild woods.'
Jomer  and  the king  spoke  together  in their  own  tongue. At length
Thjoden turned to the Wild Man.  'We will receive your offer,' he said. 'For
though we leave a host of foes behind, what matter? If the Stone-city falls,
then we shall  have  no returning. If it  is saved, then the orc-host itself
will be cut off. If you are faithful, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn, then we will  give you
rich reward, and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever.'
'Dead  men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts,' said
the Wild Man. 'But if you live after the Darkness, then leave Wild Men alone
in the woods and do  not hunt them like beasts any more. Ghvn-buri-Ghvn will
not lead  you into trap. He will go himself with father of Horse-men, and if
he leads you wrong, you will kill him.'
'So be it!' said Thjoden.
'How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road?'
asked Jomer. 'We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and  I doubt not the
way is narrow.'
'Wild Men go quick on feet,' said Ghvn. 'Way is wide for four horses in
Stonewain  Valley  yonder,'  he waved his hand southwards;  'but  narrow  at
beginning and at end.  Wild  Man could walk from here to Don between sunrise
and noon.'
'Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders,' said  Jomer;
'but  we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unforeseen may
hinder us, and if our host is all strung out, it will be long  ere it can be
set in order when we issue from the hills. What is the hour now?'
'Who knows?' said Thjoden. 'All is night now.'
'It is all dark, but  it is not all night.' said Ghvn.  'When Sun comes
we   feel   her,  even  when  she   is  hidden.   Already  she  climbs  over
East-mountains. It is the opening of day in the sky-fields.'
'Then  we must  set  out  as soon as may be,' said Jomer.  'Even so  we
cannot hope to come to Gondor's aid today.'
Merry waited to  hear  no  more, but slipped away to get ready for  the
summons to the march. This was  the last stage before the battle. It did not
seem  likely to him  that  many of them would survive it. But he thought  of
Pippin and the flames in Minas Tirith and thrust down his own dread.
All  went well that day, and no sight  or sound had  they  of the enemy
waiting to waylay them. The Wild Men had put  out a screen  of wary hunters,
so that no orc or roving spy should learn of the movements in the hills. The
light was more dim  than ever as they drew nearer to  the  beleaguered city,
and the Riders  passed  in long files like dark shadows  of men and  horses.
Each  company  was guided by  a wild woodman; but old Ghvn walked beside
the
king. The  start had been slower than was  hoped, for it had  taken time for
the Riders, walking and leading their horses, to find paths over the thickly
wooded ridges behind  their camp  and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley.
It was  late in the afternoon  when the leaders came  to wide  grey thickets
stretching beyond the eastward side of  Amon Don, and masking a great gap in
the line of hills that from Nardol to Don ran east and west. Through the gap
the forgotten wain-road long ago had run down,  back into the main horse-way
from the City  through Anurien; but now for many lives of men  trees had had
their way with  it, and it had vanished, broken and buried under  the leaves
of uncounted years. But  the  thickets offered to the Riders their last hope
of cover before they went into open battle; for beyond them lay the road and
the plains  of Anduin,  while east and southwards  the slopes  were bare and
rocky,  as the writhen hills  gathered  themselves  together and climbed up,
bastion upon bastion, into the great mass and shoulders of Mindolluin.
The leading company was halted, and as those behind filed up out of the
trough of the Stonewain Valley they spread out  and passed to camping-places
under the grey trees. The king  summoned the captains to council. Jomer sent
out scouts to spy upon the road; but old Ghvn shook his head.
'No good to send Horse-men,' he said. 'Wild Men  have already  seen all
that can be seen in the bad air. They will come soon and speak to me here.'
The  captains came;  and  then  out of  the  trees crept  warily  other
p®kel-shapes so like old Ghvn that Merry  could hardly tell them apart. They
spoke to Ghvn in a strange throaty language.
