East-mountains. It is the opening of day in the sky-fields.'
'Then  we must  set  out  as soon as may be,' said Jomer.  'Even so  we
cannot hope to come to Gondor's aid today.'
Merry waited to  hear  no  more, but slipped away to get ready for  the
summons to the march. This was  the last stage before the battle. It did not
seem  likely to him  that  many of them would survive it. But he thought  of
Pippin and the flames in Minas Tirith and thrust down his own dread.
All  went well that day, and no sight  or sound had  they  of the enemy
waiting to waylay them. The Wild Men had put  out a screen  of wary hunters,
so that no orc or roving spy should learn of the movements in the hills. The
light was more dim  than ever as they drew nearer to  the  beleaguered city,
and the Riders  passed  in long files like dark shadows  of men and  horses.
Each  company  was guided by  a wild woodman; but old Ghvn walked beside
the
king. The  start had been slower than was  hoped, for it had  taken time for
the Riders, walking and leading their horses, to find paths over the thickly
wooded ridges behind  their camp  and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley.
It was  late in the afternoon  when the leaders came  to wide  grey thickets
stretching beyond the eastward side of  Amon Don, and masking a great gap in
the line of hills that from Nardol to Don ran east and west. Through the gap
the forgotten wain-road long ago had run down,  back into the main horse-way
from the City  through Anurien; but now for many lives of men  trees had had
their way with  it, and it had vanished, broken and buried under  the leaves
of uncounted years. But  the  thickets offered to the Riders their last hope
of cover before they went into open battle; for beyond them lay the road and
the plains  of Anduin,  while east and southwards  the slopes  were bare and
rocky,  as the writhen hills  gathered  themselves  together and climbed up,
bastion upon bastion, into the great mass and shoulders of Mindolluin.
The leading company was halted, and as those behind filed up out of the
trough of the Stonewain Valley they spread out  and passed to camping-places
under the grey trees. The king  summoned the captains to council. Jomer sent
out scouts to spy upon the road; but old Ghvn shook his head.
'No good to send Horse-men,' he said. 'Wild Men  have already  seen all
that can be seen in the bad air. They will come soon and speak to me here.'
The  captains came;  and  then  out of  the  trees crept  warily  other
p®kel-shapes so like old Ghvn that Merry  could hardly tell them apart. They
spoke to Ghvn in a strange throaty language.
Presently Ghvn turned to the king. 'Wild Men say many things ' he said.
'First, be wary! Still many  men in camp beyond Don, an hour's walk yonder,'
he waved  his arm west  towards the black beacon. 'But  none  to see between
here and Stone-folk's new walls. Many busy  there. Walls stand up no longer:
gorgyn    knock them down with earth-thunder and with clubs of black iron. They
are unwary and do not  look about  them. They think  their friends watch all
roads!' At that old  Ghvn made a curious gurgling noise, and it seemed  that
he was laughing.
'Good tidings!' cried Jomer. 'Even in this gloom hope gleams again. Our
Enemy's devices  oft serve us in his  despite.  The accursed darkness itself
has been a cloak to us. And now, lusting to destroy Gondor and throw it down
stone from stone, his  orcs have  taken away  my greatest fear. The out-wall
could have been held long against us. Now we  can sweep through - if once we
win so far.'
'Once again I thank you, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn of  the woods,'  said  Thjoden.
'Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance!'
'Kill   gorgyn ! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men ' answered
Ghvn. 'Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron!'
'To do these things we have ridden far,'  said the king,  'and we shall
attempt them. But what we shall achieve only tomorrow will show.'
Ghvn-buri-Ghvn  squatted down and touched the earth with his horny brow
in token of farewell. Then he got up as if to depart.  But suddenly he stood
looking up like some startled  woodland  animal snuffling  a  strange air. A
light came in his eyes.
'Wind  is  changing!' he cried, and  with  that, in a  twinkling as  it
seemed, he and his fellows had vanished into the glooms, never to be seen by
any Rider of Rohan again. Not long after far away  eastward  the faint drums
throbbed again. Yet  to no heart in all the host came any fear that the Wild
Men were unfaithful, strange and unlovely though they might appear.
'We need  no further  guidance,' said Elfhelm; 'for there are riders in
the host who have ridden down to Mundburg in days of peace. I for  one. When
we come to  the road it will veer south, and there will lie before  us still
seven leagues ere we reach the wall of the townlands. Along most of that way
there  is  much  grass  on  either side  of  the road. On that  stretch  the
errand-riders of  Gondor reckoned to  make their greatest speed. We may ride
it swiftly and without great rumour.'
'Then  since we  must  look  for  fell deeds and  the  need  of all our
strength,' said Jomer,  'I  counsel that we  rest now, and set out hence  by
night, and so  time our going that we come upon the fields  when tomorrow is
as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.'
To this the king  assented, and the captains departed. But soon Elfhelm
returned.  'The scouts  have found naught  to  report beyond  the grey wood,
lord,' he said, 'save two men only: two dead men and two dead horses.'
'Well?' said Jomer. 'What of it?'
'This, lord: they were errand-riders  of  Gondor; Hirgon was one maybe.
At least his hand  still clasped  the Red Arrow, but his head was  hewn off.
And this  also:  it would  seem by the signs that they were fleeing                  westward
when they fell. As I read it, they found the enemy already on the  out-wall,
or assailing it, when they  returned - and that would  be two nights ago, if
they  used  fresh  horses  from the posts, as is their wont. They  could not
reach the City and turned back.'
'Alas!' said  Thjoden. 'Then  Denethor has heard  no news of our riding
and will despair of our coming.'
' Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never           ,' said Jomer. 'And
mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since
men spoke with mouth.'
It was night. On either side of the  road the  host of Rohan was moving
silently.  Now  the  road  passing  about the skirts  of  Mindolluin  turned
southward. Far away and almost straight ahead there was a red glow under the
black sky and  the sides of the great mountain  loomed dark against it. They
were drawing near the Rammas of the Pelennor; but the day was not yet come.
The  king rode in the  midst  of the leading company, his household-men
about him. Elfhelm's        jored  came  next; and now Merry noticed  that  Dernhelm
had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at
last he was riding  just  in rear of the  king's guard. There came  a check.
Merry  heard voices  in front speaking softly.  Out-riders had come back who
had ventured forward almost to the wall. They came to the king.
'There are great  fires, lord,'  said one. 'The City is  all set  about
with flame, and the field  is full of foes.  But all seem drawn off  to  the
assault. As well as we could guess, there  are  few left  upon the out-wall,
and they are heedless, busy in destruction.'
'Do you remember the  Wild Man's words,  lord?' said another.  'I  live
upon the open Wold in days of peace;  Wndfara is my name, and to me also the
air brings messages. Already the  wind  is turning. There comes a breath out
