strength,' said Jomer,  'I  counsel that we  rest now, and set out hence  by
night, and so  time our going that we come upon the fields  when tomorrow is
as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.'
To this the king  assented, and the captains departed. But soon Elfhelm
returned.  'The scouts  have found naught  to  report beyond  the grey wood,
lord,' he said, 'save two men only: two dead men and two dead horses.'
'Well?' said Jomer. 'What of it?'
'This, lord: they were errand-riders  of  Gondor; Hirgon was one maybe.
At least his hand  still clasped  the Red Arrow, but his head was  hewn off.
And this  also:  it would  seem by the signs that they were fleeing                  westward
when they fell. As I read it, they found the enemy already on the  out-wall,
or assailing it, when they  returned - and that would  be two nights ago, if
they  used  fresh  horses  from the posts, as is their wont. They  could not
reach the City and turned back.'
'Alas!' said  Thjoden. 'Then  Denethor has heard  no news of our riding
and will despair of our coming.'
' Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never           ,' said Jomer. 'And
mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since
men spoke with mouth.'
It was night. On either side of the  road the  host of Rohan was moving
silently.  Now  the  road  passing  about the skirts  of  Mindolluin  turned
southward. Far away and almost straight ahead there was a red glow under the
black sky and  the sides of the great mountain  loomed dark against it. They
were drawing near the Rammas of the Pelennor; but the day was not yet come.
The  king rode in the  midst  of the leading company, his household-men
about him. Elfhelm's        jored  came  next; and now Merry noticed  that  Dernhelm
had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at
last he was riding  just  in rear of the  king's guard. There came  a check.
Merry  heard voices  in front speaking softly.  Out-riders had come back who
had ventured forward almost to the wall. They came to the king.
'There are great  fires, lord,'  said one. 'The City is  all set  about
with flame, and the field  is full of foes.  But all seem drawn off  to  the
assault. As well as we could guess, there  are  few left  upon the out-wall,
and they are heedless, busy in destruction.'
'Do you remember the  Wild Man's words,  lord?' said another.  'I  live
upon the open Wold in days of peace;  Wndfara is my name, and to me also the
air brings messages. Already the  wind  is turning. There comes a breath out
of the South;  there  is a sea-tang in it, faint  though it be.  The morning
will bring new things.  Above  the reek  it will  be dawn  when you pass the
wall.'
'If  you speak truly, Wndfara, then  may  you live beyond  this day  in
years of blessedness!' said Thjoden.  He turned to the  men of his household
who were  near, and he spoke now  in a clear voice  so that many also of the
riders of the first   jored   heard him:
'Now is the hour come, Riders of the Mark, sons  of Eorl! Foes and fire
are before you,  and your homes far  behind.  Yet, though you fight upon  an
alien field, the glory that you reap there shall be your own for ever. Oaths
ye  have  taken:  now fulfil them  all,  to  lord  and  land  and league  of
friendship!'
Men clashed spear upon shield.
'Jomer, my son! You  lead the first         jored  ,' said Thjoden; 'and it shall
go behind the king's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your company to the
right when we pass the wall.  And  Grimbold shall lead his towards the left.
Let  the other companies behind follow these three that lead,  as  they have
chance.  Strike wherever the  enemy gathers. Other plans we cannot make, for
we know  not  yet  how things  stand upon the field.  Forth now, and fear no
darkness!'
The leading company rode off as swiftly as they could, for it was still
deep dark,  whatever change Wndfara  might forebode. Merry was riding
behind
Dernhelm,  clutching  with the  left hand  while  with the other he tried to
loosen his sword in its sheath. He felt now  bitterly  the  truth of the old
king's  words:     in such  a battle what would you do Meriadoc?                 Just this,' he
thought: 'encumber a rider, and hope at best to stay in my  seat and  not be
pounded to death by galloping hoofs!'
It was no  more than a  league  to where the out-walls had stood.  They
soon reached them; too soon for  Merry. Wild cries broke out, and  there was
some clash of arms, but it was brief. The orcs busy about the walls were few
and amazed, and they were quickly  slain or driven off. Before the  ruin  of
the north-gate  in the Rammas the king halted again. The first                  jored  drew up
behind  him and about him on either side.  Dernhelm kept close to the  king,
though Elfhelm's company was away on  the right. Grimbold's men turned
aside
and passed round to a great gap in the wall further eastward.
Merry peered from behind Dernhelm's  back. Far away, maybe ten miles or
more, there was a great burning, but between it and the Riders lines of fire
blazed in  a vast crescent, at the nearest point less than a league distant.
He could make out little more on the dark plain,  and as yet he  neither saw
any hope of morning, nor felt any wind, changed or unchanged.
Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward  into the field of Gondor,
pouring in slowly but steadily, like the rising  tide through breaches in  a
dike  that men  have  thought secure.  But  the  mind  and will of the Black
Captain were bent wholly on the falling city, and  as yet no tidings came to
him warning that his designs held any flaw.
After a while the  king led  his  men away somewhat  eastward, to  come
between  the  fires  of  the siege  and the outer  fields. Still  they  were
unchallenged,  and  still Thjoden gave  no signal. At last  he  halted  once
again. The City was now nearer. A smell of burning was in the air and a very
shadow  of  death.  The horses were uneasy. But the king sat upon  Snowmane,
motionless, gazing upon the agony of Minas Tirith,  as if  stricken suddenly
by  anguish, or by  dread.  He  seemed to shrink  down, cowed by  age. Merry
himself  felt as  if a great weight of horror and doubt had settled  on him.
His  heart  beat slowly. Time  seemed poised in  uncertainty. They  were too
late! Too late was worse  than never! Perhaps Thjoden would  quail,  bow his
old head, turn, slink away to hide in the hills.
Then suddenly Merry felt  it at  last, beyond doubt: a change. Wind was
in his face! Light was glimmering. Far, far  away, in  the  South the clouds
could be dimly seen as remote grey shapes, rolling up, drifting: morning lay
beyond them.
But at that same moment  there was a flash, as if lightning  had sprung
from the earth beneath the City. For a searing second it stood dazzling  far
off in black and white, its topmost tower like a glittering needle: and then
as the darkness closed  again  there came rolling over  the fields  a  great
boom   .
At that sound  the bent shape  of the king sprang suddenly  erect. Tall
and  proud he seemed again; and  rising in his  stirrups he  cried in a loud
voice, more clear than any there had ever heard a mortal man achieve before:
Arise, arise, Riders of Thjoden!
Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter!
spear shall be shaken, shield be splintered,
a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises!
