Merry peered from behind Dernhelm's  back. Far away, maybe ten miles or
more, there was a great burning, but between it and the Riders lines of fire
blazed in  a vast crescent, at the nearest point less than a league distant.
He could make out little more on the dark plain,  and as yet he  neither saw
any hope of morning, nor felt any wind, changed or unchanged.
Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward  into the field of Gondor,
pouring in slowly but steadily, like the rising  tide through breaches in  a
dike  that men  have  thought secure.  But  the  mind  and will of the Black
Captain were bent wholly on the falling city, and  as yet no tidings came to
him warning that his designs held any flaw.
After a while the  king led  his  men away somewhat  eastward, to  come
between  the  fires  of  the siege  and the outer  fields. Still  they  were
unchallenged,  and  still Thjoden gave  no signal. At last  he  halted  once
again. The City was now nearer. A smell of burning was in the air and a very
shadow  of  death.  The horses were uneasy. But the king sat upon  Snowmane,
motionless, gazing upon the agony of Minas Tirith,  as if  stricken suddenly
by  anguish, or by  dread.  He  seemed to shrink  down, cowed by  age. Merry
himself  felt as  if a great weight of horror and doubt had settled  on him.
His  heart  beat slowly. Time  seemed poised in  uncertainty. They  were too
late! Too late was worse  than never! Perhaps Thjoden would  quail,  bow his
old head, turn, slink away to hide in the hills.
Then suddenly Merry felt  it at  last, beyond doubt: a change. Wind was
in his face! Light was glimmering. Far, far  away, in  the  South the clouds
could be dimly seen as remote grey shapes, rolling up, drifting: morning lay
beyond them.
But at that same moment  there was a flash, as if lightning  had sprung
from the earth beneath the City. For a searing second it stood dazzling  far
off in black and white, its topmost tower like a glittering needle: and then
as the darkness closed  again  there came rolling over  the fields  a  great
boom   .
At that sound  the bent shape  of the king sprang suddenly  erect. Tall
and  proud he seemed again; and  rising in his  stirrups he  cried in a loud
voice, more clear than any there had ever heard a mortal man achieve before:
Arise, arise, Riders of Thjoden!
Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter!
spear shall be shaken, shield be splintered,
a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises!
Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor!
With that he seized a great horn from Guthlbf his banner-bearer, and he
blew such a blast  upon it  that it burst asunder. And  straightway all  the
horns in the host were lifted up in music, and the  blowing  of the horns of
Rohan  in that  hour was like a  storm  upon the plain and  a thunder in the
mountains.
Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor!
Suddenly the king cried to Snowmane and the  horse sprang away.  Behind
him his banner  blew in the wind,  white horse upon a field of green, but he
outpaced it. After  him thundered the knights of his house,  but he was ever
before them.  Jomer rode there, the white horsetail on his  helm floating in
his speed, and the front of the first        jored   roared like a breaker foaming to
the shore, but Thjoden  could  not  be overtaken.  Fey  he  seemed,  or  the
battle-fury of his fathers ran  like new tire in his veins, and he was borne
up on Snowmane like a god of old, even as Oroml the  Great in the battle  of
the Valar when the world was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo!
it shone like an image of the Sun, and the grass flamed into green about the
white feet of his steed. For morning came, morning and a  wind from the sea;
and  the darkness was  removed, and the hosts  of Mordor wailed,  and terror
took them, and they fled,  and died, and the hoofs of  wrath rode over them.
And then all the host of Rohan burst into song, and they sang  as they slew,
for the  joy of battle was on  them, and the sound of their singing that was
fair and terrible came even to the City.
Chapter 6. The Battle of the Pelennor
Fields
But  it was  no  orc-chieftain or  brigand that led  the  assault  upon
Gondor. The darkness was breaking too soon, before the date  that his Master
had set for it:  fortune had betrayed him for  the moment, and the world had
turned against him; victory was slipping from his grasp even as he stretched
out his  hand  to seize it. But  his arm was long. He was still  in command,
wielding  great  powers. King, Ringwraith,  Lord of the Nazgyl, he  had many
weapons. He left the Gate and vanished.
Thjoden  King of  the  Mark  had reached the road from the Gate to  the
River, and he turned towards the City that was now less than a mile distant.
He slackened his speed  a little, seeking new foes,  and  his  knights  came
about him, and Dernhelm was with  them. Ahead nearer the walls Elfhelm's
men
were among the  siege-engines, hewing, slaying, driving their foes into  the
fire-pits. Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun,  and
there camps were  blazing, orcs were  flying towards  the  River like  herds
before the hunters; and the Rohirrim went hither  and thither at their will.
But they had not yet overthrown the siege, nor won the Gate. Many foes stood
before  it, and on the  further  half of the  plain were  other hosts  still
unfought. Southward beyond the road lay  the main force of the Haradrim, and
there  their  horsemen were gathered about the standard of  their chieftain.
And he looked  out, and in the growing light he saw the banner of  the king,
and that  it was far  ahead of the battle with few men about it. Then he was
filled with a  red wrath  and shouted aloud, and  displaying  his  standard,
black serpent upon  scarlet, he  came against the white  horse and the green
with great press of men; and  the  drawing of the scimitars of the Southrons
was like a glitter of stars.
Then Thjoden was  aware of  him, and  would not wait for his onset, but
crying to Snowmane he  charged headlong to greet him. Great was the clash of
their  meeting. But the white fury  of the Northmen burned the  hotter,  and
more skilled  was  their knighthood with long spears  and bitter. Fewer were
they  but they  clove through the Southrons  like a fire-bolt  in  a forest.
Right  through the press  drove  Thjoden Thengel's son,  and  his  spear was
