was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock  and Rushey.
But  most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar,
half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter  of fact, they were not very
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point:
they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim.
Their land  was originally unprotected from the East; but on  that side
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been  planted many  generations
ago, and was now thick and  tail, for it  was constantly tended. It  ran all
the  way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop  curving away from the river,
to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle flowed  out  of  the Forest  into  the
Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to  end. But, of course, it was
not  a complete  protection.  The Forest  drew  close  to the hedge in  many
places.  The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after  dark,  and that also
was not usual in the Shire.
The  ferry-boat moved slowly  across the water. The Buckland shore drew
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his
old life lay behind  in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone
on living quietly at Bag End.
The four  hobbits stepped off the ferry.  Merry was  tying  it up,  and
Pippin  was already leading  the pony up the  path, when Sam  (who had  been
looking back, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper:
'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?'
On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just  make  out a
figure: it looked like a  dark black bundle left behind. But as they  looked
it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It
then crawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.
'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry.
'Something that is following us,' said Frodo. 'But don't ask  any  more
now!  Let's get away  at once!' They hurried up the path to the top  of  the
bank,  but when  they  looked  back  the far shore was shrouded in mist, and
nothing could be seen.
'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west-bank!' said Frodo.
'Can horses cross the river?'
'They  can go twenty miles north to Brandywine  Bridge - or they  might
swim,'  answered  Merry. 'Though  I  never heard of any horse  swimming  the
Brandywine. But what have  horses to do with it?' I'll tell you later. Let's
get indoors and then we can talk.'
'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tell
Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about supper and things.'
'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo; 'but we could
do with another.'
'You shall have it! Give  me that basket!' said  Merry, and  rode ahead
into the darkness.
It  was some distance from  the  Brandywine  to  Frodo's new  house  at
Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the
outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from
the Bridge. Half a mile northward  along this they came to a lane opening on
their  right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it  climbed up and
down into the country.
At last  they  came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could be
seen  of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of
a wide  circle of  lawn surrounded by  a belt of  low trees inside the outer
hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an  out-of-the-way corner of
the country, and there were  no other dwellings close  by.  You could get in
and out  without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the
Brandybucks, for the use  of guests, or members of the family that wished to
escape  from  the  crowded  life  of  Brandy  Hall  for a  time.  It  was an
old-fashioned  countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it
was long and low,  with no  upper storey; and it had a roof  of  turf, round
windows, and a large round door.
As they walked lip the green path  from  the gate no light was visible;
the  windows  were dark and shuttered.  Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty
Bolger opened it. A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on
either side; in  front  of them a  passage ran back  down the  middle of the
house.
'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'We
have  done our  best in  a short time to make it  look  like home. After all
Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.'
Frodo looked  round.  It did  look like home. Many of his own favourite
things -  or Bilbo's things (they  reminded  him sharply of him in their new
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been  at Bag End.
It  was  a  pleasant,  comfortable,  welcoming  place;  and he found himself
wishing  that he was really coming  here to settle down in quiet retirement.
It  seemed unfair  to have put his friends  to  all  this  trouble;  and  he
wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave
them so soon, indeed at  once. Yet that  would  have  to be  done  that very
night, before they all went to bed.
'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I  hardly feel that I  have
moved at all.'
The  travellers hung  up their  cloaks,  and piled  their packs  on the
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end.
Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.
'A bath!' cried Pippin. 'O blessed Meriadoc!'
'Which order  shall we  go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest  first, or quickest
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.'
'Trust me to arrange things  better than that!'  said Merry.  'We can't
begin life  at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are
three   tubs, and  a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats
and soap. Get inside, and be quick!'
Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage,
and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations  for  a late supper.
Snatches of competing songs came  from the bathroom mixed  with the sound
of
splashing and wallowing.  The voice of Pippin was  suddenly lifted up  above
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs.
Sing hey! for the bath at close of day
that washes the weary mud away!
A loon is he that will not sing:
O! Water Hot is a noble thing!
O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;
but better than rain or rippling streams
is Water Hot that smokes and steams.
O! Water cold we may pour at need
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;
but better is Beer, if drink we lack,
