Chapter 6. The Battle of the Pelennor
Fields
But  it was  no  orc-chieftain or  brigand that led  the  assault  upon
Gondor. The darkness was breaking too soon, before the date  that his Master
had set for it:  fortune had betrayed him for  the moment, and the world had
turned against him; victory was slipping from his grasp even as he stretched
out his  hand  to seize it. But  his arm was long. He was still  in command,
wielding  great  powers. King, Ringwraith,  Lord of the Nazgyl, he  had many
weapons. He left the Gate and vanished.
Thjoden  King of  the  Mark  had reached the road from the Gate to  the
River, and he turned towards the City that was now less than a mile distant.
He slackened his speed  a little, seeking new foes,  and  his  knights  came
about him, and Dernhelm was with  them. Ahead nearer the walls Elfhelm's
men
were among the  siege-engines, hewing, slaying, driving their foes into  the
fire-pits. Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun,  and
there camps were  blazing, orcs were  flying towards  the  River like  herds
before the hunters; and the Rohirrim went hither  and thither at their will.
But they had not yet overthrown the siege, nor won the Gate. Many foes stood
before  it, and on the  further  half of the  plain were  other hosts  still
unfought. Southward beyond the road lay  the main force of the Haradrim, and
there  their  horsemen were gathered about the standard of  their chieftain.
And he looked  out, and in the growing light he saw the banner of  the king,
and that  it was far  ahead of the battle with few men about it. Then he was
filled with a  red wrath  and shouted aloud, and  displaying  his  standard,
black serpent upon  scarlet, he  came against the white  horse and the green
with great press of men; and  the  drawing of the scimitars of the Southrons
was like a glitter of stars.
Then Thjoden was  aware of  him, and  would not wait for his onset, but
crying to Snowmane he  charged headlong to greet him. Great was the clash of
their  meeting. But the white fury  of the Northmen burned the  hotter,  and
more skilled  was  their knighthood with long spears  and bitter. Fewer were
they  but they  clove through the Southrons  like a fire-bolt  in  a forest.
Right  through the press  drove  Thjoden Thengel's son,  and  his  spear was
shivered as he threw down  their chieftain.  Out  swept  his sword,  and  he
spurred  to  the  standard,  hewed staff  and bearer;  and the black serpent
foundered. Then all that was left unslain of  their cavalry  turned and fled
far away.
But  lo! suddenly in  the  midst of the glory  of the  king his  golden
shield was dimmed. The new morning was blotted from the sky. Dark fell
about
him. Horses reared and screamed. Men cast  from the saddle lay grovelling on
the ground.
'To  me!  To me!' cried Thjoden. 'Up Eorlingas!  Fear no darkness!' But
Snowmane wild with terror stood up  on high, fighting with the air, and then
with a great scream he crashed upon his side: a black dart had pierced  him.
The king fell beneath him.
The great shadow  descended like a falling cloud. And behold!  it was a
winged  creature: if bird, then  greater than all  other  birds, and it  was
naked, and neither quill nor  feather did it bear, and its vast pinions were
as webs of hide between horned fingers; and it stank. A creature of an older
world maybe it  was,  whose  kind,  fingering  in  forgotten mountains  cold
beneath the Moon,  outstayed their day,  and in hideous eyrie bred this last
untimely brood, apt to evil. And the Dark  Lord took it, and nursed it  with
fell meats, until  it grew beyond the measure of all  other things that fly;
and he gave it to his servant to be his steed. Down, down it came, and then,
folding its fingered webs, it gave a croaking cry, and settled upon the body
of Snowmane, digging in its claws, stooping its long naked neck.
Upon it  sat a shape, black-mantled, huge and threatening. A  crown  of
steel he bore, but between rim and robe naught was there to see, save only a
deadly  gleam of eyes: the Lord  of the  Nazgyl. To the air he had returned,
summoning  his  steed ere the darkness failed,  and now he was  come  again,
bringing ruin,  turning hope to despair, and victory to death. A great black
mace he wielded.
But Thjoden  was  not utterly forsaken. The  knights of  his house  lay
slain about him, or else mastered by the madness of  their steeds were borne
far away. Yet one stood  there still:  Dernhelm  the  young, faithful beyond
fear; and he wept, for he had  loved his lord as a father. Right through the
charge Merry had  been borne unharmed behind him, until the Shadow came;
and
then  Windfola  had thrown  them in his terror, and now  ran  wild upon  the
plain. Merry crawled on all fours like a dazed beast, and  such a horror was
on him that he was blind and sick.
'King's man! King's man!' his heart cried within him. 'You must stay by
him. As a father you shall be to me, you said.' But his will made no answer,
and his body shook. He dared not open his eyes or look up.
Then out of the blackness in his mind he thought that he heard Dernhelm
speaking; yet now the voice seemed strange, recalling some other voice  that
he had known.
'Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion! Leave the dead in peace!'
A cold voice answered: 'Come not between the Nazgyl and his prey! Or he
will not slay thee  in thy turn. He  will  bear  thee away to the houses  of
lamentation, beyond all darkness, where thy flesh shall be devoured, and thy
shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye.'
A sword rang as it was drawn. 'Do what you will; but  I will hinder it,
if I may.'
'Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!'
Then  Merry heard of all sounds in that  hour the  strangest. It seemed
that Dernhelm laughed, and the clear voice was like the  ring of steel. 'But
no living man am I! You look upon a  woman.  Jowyn I am, Jomund's
daughter.
You  stand  between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless!
For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.'
The winged creature screamed at her, but the Ringwraith made no answer,
and was silent, as if in sudden doubt. Very amazement for a moment conquered
Merry's fear. He  opened his  eyes  and the  blackness was lifted from them.
There some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it,
and above  it loomed the  Nazgyl Lord like a shadow of despair.  A little to
the left facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the  helm of
her  secrecy,  had fallen from  her, and her bright  hair, released from its
bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon  her shoulders. Her eyes  grey as the sea
were  hard  and fell, and yet tears were  on  her cheek. A sword was in  her
hand, and she raised her shield against the horror of her enemy's eyes.
Jowyn  it  was,  and  Dernhelm  also. For into Merry's mind flashed the
memory of the face that he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the face of one
that goes seeking death, having no  hope. Pity  filled his heart  and  great
wonder, and suddenly the slow-kindled courage of his race awoke. He clenched
his hand. She should not die, so fair, so desperate At  least she should not
