plain. Merry crawled on all fours like a dazed beast, and  such a horror was
on him that he was blind and sick.
'King's man! King's man!' his heart cried within him. 'You must stay by
him. As a father you shall be to me, you said.' But his will made no answer,
and his body shook. He dared not open his eyes or look up.
Then out of the blackness in his mind he thought that he heard Dernhelm
speaking; yet now the voice seemed strange, recalling some other voice  that
he had known.
'Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion! Leave the dead in peace!'
A cold voice answered: 'Come not between the Nazgyl and his prey! Or he
will not slay thee  in thy turn. He  will  bear  thee away to the houses  of
lamentation, beyond all darkness, where thy flesh shall be devoured, and thy
shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye.'
A sword rang as it was drawn. 'Do what you will; but  I will hinder it,
if I may.'
'Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!'
Then  Merry heard of all sounds in that  hour the  strangest. It seemed
that Dernhelm laughed, and the clear voice was like the  ring of steel. 'But
no living man am I! You look upon a  woman.  Jowyn I am, Jomund's
daughter.
You  stand  between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless!
For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.'
The winged creature screamed at her, but the Ringwraith made no answer,
and was silent, as if in sudden doubt. Very amazement for a moment conquered
Merry's fear. He  opened his  eyes  and the  blackness was lifted from them.
There some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it,
and above  it loomed the  Nazgyl Lord like a shadow of despair.  A little to
the left facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the  helm of
her  secrecy,  had fallen from  her, and her bright  hair, released from its
bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon  her shoulders. Her eyes  grey as the sea
were  hard  and fell, and yet tears were  on  her cheek. A sword was in  her
hand, and she raised her shield against the horror of her enemy's eyes.
Jowyn  it  was,  and  Dernhelm  also. For into Merry's mind flashed the
memory of the face that he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the face of one
that goes seeking death, having no  hope. Pity  filled his heart  and  great
wonder, and suddenly the slow-kindled courage of his race awoke. He clenched
his hand. She should not die, so fair, so desperate At  least she should not
die alone, unaided.
The face of their enemy was not turned towards him, but still he hardly
dared  to move,  dreading lest  the deadly eyes should fall  on him. Slowly,
slowly he began to crawl aside; but the Black  Captain, in doubt  and malice
intent upon the woman before him, heeded him no more than a worm in the
mud.
Suddenly the great beast beat its hideous  wings, and the  wind of them
was foul.  Again it  leaped into the  air, and then  swiftly fell  down upon
Jowyn, shrieking, striking with beak and claw.
Still  she  did  not blench:  maiden of  the Rohirrim, child of  kings,
slender but as a steel-blade, fair but terrible.  A  swift stroke she dealt,
skilled and deadly.  The outstretched neck she clove asunder,  and the  hewn
head fell like a stone.  Backward she sprang  as the huge  shape  crashed to
ruin, vast wings outspread,  crumpled on the  earth; and with  its fall  the
shadow passed  away. A light  fell about her,  and  her  hair  shone  in the
sunrise.
Out of the  wreck rose the Black  Rider, tall and threatening, towering
above her. With  a cry of hatred that stung the very ears  like venom he let
fall  his mace. Her  shield was  shivered  in  many pieces, and her  arm was
broken; she stumbled to her knees. He bent  over  her like  a cloud, and his
eyes glittered; he raised his mace to kill.
But suddenly he too stumbled forward with a cry of bitter pain, and his
stroke went  wide,  driving into the ground.  Merry's  sword had stabbed him
from behind, shearing  through  the black mantle, and passing up beneath the
hauberk had pierced the sinew behind his mighty knee.
'Jowyn! Jowyn!'  cried  Merry.  Then tottering, struggling up, with her
last strength she drove her sword between  crown and  mantle, as  the  great
shoulders bowed before her. The sword broke sparkling into many shards.  The
crown rolled away with  a clang. Jowyn fell forward upon her fallen foe. But
lo! the mantle and hauberk were empty. Shapeless they lay now on the ground,
torn and tumbled; and a cry went up into the shuddering air, and faded  to a
shrill wailing, passing with  the wind, a voice bodiless and thin that died,
and was swallowed up, and was never heard again in that age of this world.
And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain, blinking
like an owl in  the daylight, for  tears blinded him; and through  a mist he
looked on Jowyn's fair head, as  she lay and did not move; and  he looked on
the face of the king, fallen in the midst  of his glory, For Snowmane in his
agony had rolled away from him again; yet he was the bane of his master.
Then  Merry stooped and  lifted his hand to kiss  it,  and  lo! Thjoden
opened  his eyes, and they were clear, and he spoke in a quiet voice  though
laboured.
'Farewell, Master Holbytla!'  he said. 'My body  is broken. I go to  my
fathers.  And  even  in their mighty  company  I shall not now be ashamed. I
felled the black serpent. A grim morn, and a glad day, and a golden sunset!'
Merry could  not speak, but wept anew. 'Forgive me,  lord,' he  said at
last, 'if  I broke  your command, and  yet have done no more in your service
than to weep at our parting.'
The old king smiled. 'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great  heart will not
be denied. Live now  in blessedness; and when  you  sit  in peace with  your
pipe, think  of  me! For  never now shall I  sit with you in Meduseld,  as I
promised, or listen to your herb-lore.' He closed his eyes, and Merry  bowed
beside him. Presently  he spoke again. 'Where is  Jomer? For my eyes darken,
and I would see him ere I go.  He must be  king after  me. And  I would send
word to Jowyn. She, she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see
her again, dearer than daughter.'
'Lord,  lord,' began Merry brokenly, 'she  is--';  but  at that  moment
there  was  a  great clamour, and all  about  them horns and  trumpets  were
blowing. Merry looked round:  he had forgotten  the war, and  all  the world
beside, and many hours it  seemed since the king rode to his fall, though in
truth it was only a little while. But now he saw that they were in danger of
being caught  in  the  very midst  of the great  battle that would  soon  be
joined.
New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River;  and
from  under the walls came  the  legions of Morgul; and  from  the southward
fields came footmen of Harad with horsemen before them, and behind them
rose
the huge backs of the       mymakil     with war-towers  upon them. But  northward the
white crest of Jomer led the great front of  the Rohirrim which he had again
gathered and marshalled;  and out of the City  came all the  strength of men
that  was in  it, and  the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne  in  the van,
driving the enemy from the Gate.
For  a  moment  the thought flitted through  Merry's  mind:  'Where  is
Gandalf? Is he not here? Could he not  have saved the  king and Jowyn?'  But
thereupon Jomer rode  up  in haste, and with him  came the  knights  of  the
