agony had rolled away from him again; yet he was the bane of his master.
Then  Merry stooped and  lifted his hand to kiss  it,  and  lo! Thjoden
opened  his eyes, and they were clear, and he spoke in a quiet voice  though
laboured.
'Farewell, Master Holbytla!'  he said. 'My body  is broken. I go to  my
fathers.  And  even  in their mighty  company  I shall not now be ashamed. I
felled the black serpent. A grim morn, and a glad day, and a golden sunset!'
Merry could  not speak, but wept anew. 'Forgive me,  lord,' he  said at
last, 'if  I broke  your command, and  yet have done no more in your service
than to weep at our parting.'
The old king smiled. 'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great  heart will not
be denied. Live now  in blessedness; and when  you  sit  in peace with  your
pipe, think  of  me! For  never now shall I  sit with you in Meduseld,  as I
promised, or listen to your herb-lore.' He closed his eyes, and Merry  bowed
beside him. Presently  he spoke again. 'Where is  Jomer? For my eyes darken,
and I would see him ere I go.  He must be  king after  me. And  I would send
word to Jowyn. She, she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see
her again, dearer than daughter.'
'Lord,  lord,' began Merry brokenly, 'she  is--';  but  at that  moment
there  was  a  great clamour, and all  about  them horns and  trumpets  were
blowing. Merry looked round:  he had forgotten  the war, and  all  the world
beside, and many hours it  seemed since the king rode to his fall, though in
truth it was only a little while. But now he saw that they were in danger of
being caught  in  the  very midst  of the great  battle that would  soon  be
joined.
New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River;  and
from  under the walls came  the  legions of Morgul; and  from  the southward
fields came footmen of Harad with horsemen before them, and behind them
rose
the huge backs of the       mymakil     with war-towers  upon them. But  northward the
white crest of Jomer led the great front of  the Rohirrim which he had again
gathered and marshalled;  and out of the City  came all the  strength of men
that  was in  it, and  the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne  in  the van,
driving the enemy from the Gate.
For  a  moment  the thought flitted through  Merry's  mind:  'Where  is
Gandalf? Is he not here? Could he not  have saved the  king and Jowyn?'  But
thereupon Jomer rode  up  in haste, and with him  came the  knights  of  the
household that still lived and had now mastered their horses. They looked in
wonder  at  the carcase of the fell  beast that lay there:  and their steeds
would  not go near. But Jomer leaped from the  saddle, and  grief and dismay
fell upon him as he came to the king's side and stood there in silence.
Then one of the knights took the king's banner from the hand of Guthlbf
the banner-bearer who  lay  dead, and he lifted it up. Slowly Thjoden opened
his eyes. Seeing the banner he made a sign that it should be given to Jomer.
'Hail, King of  the Mark!' he said.  'Ride now  to  victory!  Bid Jowyn
farewell!' And so he died,  and knew  not that Jowyn lay near him. And those
who stood by wept, crying: 'Thjoden King! Thjoden King!'
But Jomer said to them:
Mourn not overmuch! Mighty was the fallen,
meet was his ending. When his mound is raised,
women then shall weep. War now calls us!
Yet  he himself wept  as he spoke.  'Let  his knights remain  here,' he
said; 'and bear his body in honour from the field, lest the battle ride over
it! Yea, and all these other of the king's men that lie here.' And he looked
at  the  slain,  recalling their  names. Then suddenly he beheld  his sister
Jowyn as she lay, and he knew her. He stood a moment as a man who is
pierced
in the midst of a cry by an arrow through the heart;  and then his face went
deathly white;  and a cold  fury rose in him, so that  all speech failed him
for a while. A fey mood took him.
'Jowyn,  Jowyn!'  he  cried at last:  'Jowyn,  how come you  here? What
madness or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!'
Then without taking  counsel or waiting for the approach of  the men of
the City, he spurred headlong back  to the front of the great host, and blew
a horn, and cried  aloud for  the onset. Over the field rang his clear voice
calling: 'Death! Ride, ride to ruin and the world's ending!'
And with that the host  began to move. But the Rohirrim sang  no  more.
Death    they cried with one voice loud and terrible, and gathering speed  like
a  great tide their battle swept about their fallen king and passed, roaring
away southwards.
And still  Meriadoc  the hobbit stood there blinking through  his tears
and no one spoke to him, indeed none seemed to heed him. He brushed away
the
tears, and stooped to pick up the green shield that Jowyn had given him; and
he slung it at his back.  Then he looked for his sword that he had let fall;
for even as he struck his blow his arm was numbed, and now he could only use
his left hand. And behold! there  lay his weapon, but the blade  was smoking
like a dry branch that has been thrust in  a fire; and as  he watched it, it
writhed and withered and was consumed.
So passed the sword  of the Barrow-downs, work of Westernesse. But glad
would  he have been  to know its fate who wrought  it slowly long ago in the
North-kingdom when the D®nedain were young,  and chief among  their foes
was
the dread realm of Angmar and its sorcerer king. No other blade, not  though
mightier hands had wielded it, would have dealt that foe a wound  so bitter,
cleaving the undead flesh, breaking the spell that knit his unseen sinews to
his will.
Men now raised the  king, and laying cloaks upon  spear-truncheons they
made shift to bear him away towards the City; and others lifted Jowyn gently
up and bore her after him.  But  the  men of the king's household they could
not yet bring from  the  field; for seven of the king's knights  had  fallen
there, and Djorwine their chief was among them. So they laid them apart from
their foes and the fell beast and set spears about them. And afterwards when
all was over men returned  and  made a fire there  and burned the carcase of
the beast; but for Snowmane  they dug a grave and set up a stone  upon which
was carved in the tongues of Gondor and the Mark:
Faithful servant yet master's bane
Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane.
Green and long  grew the grass  on  Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and
bare was the ground where the beast was burned.
Now slowly and sadly Merry  walked beside the bearers,  and he gave  no
more  heed to  the battle.  He was weary and  full  of  pain, and  his limbs
trembled as  with  a chill. A great  rain came out of the Sea, and it seemed
that all things wept for Thjoden and  Jowyn, quenching the fires in the City
with grey tears.  It was through a mist that presently he saw the van of the
men of Gondor  approaching. Imrahil,  Prince of Dol Amroth, rode up and
drew
rein before them.
'What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan?' he cried.
'Thjoden King,' they answered. 'He is dead. But Jomer King now rides in
the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.'
