he slung it at his back.  Then he looked for his sword that he had let fall;
for even as he struck his blow his arm was numbed, and now he could only use
his left hand. And behold! there  lay his weapon, but the blade  was smoking
like a dry branch that has been thrust in  a fire; and as  he watched it, it
writhed and withered and was consumed.
So passed the sword  of the Barrow-downs, work of Westernesse. But glad
would  he have been  to know its fate who wrought  it slowly long ago in the
North-kingdom when the D®nedain were young,  and chief among  their foes
was
the dread realm of Angmar and its sorcerer king. No other blade, not  though
mightier hands had wielded it, would have dealt that foe a wound  so bitter,
cleaving the undead flesh, breaking the spell that knit his unseen sinews to
his will.
Men now raised the  king, and laying cloaks upon  spear-truncheons they
made shift to bear him away towards the City; and others lifted Jowyn gently
up and bore her after him.  But  the  men of the king's household they could
not yet bring from  the  field; for seven of the king's knights  had  fallen
there, and Djorwine their chief was among them. So they laid them apart from
their foes and the fell beast and set spears about them. And afterwards when
all was over men returned  and  made a fire there  and burned the carcase of
the beast; but for Snowmane  they dug a grave and set up a stone  upon which
was carved in the tongues of Gondor and the Mark:
Faithful servant yet master's bane
Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane.
Green and long  grew the grass  on  Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and
bare was the ground where the beast was burned.
Now slowly and sadly Merry  walked beside the bearers,  and he gave  no
more  heed to  the battle.  He was weary and  full  of  pain, and  his limbs
trembled as  with  a chill. A great  rain came out of the Sea, and it seemed
that all things wept for Thjoden and  Jowyn, quenching the fires in the City
with grey tears.  It was through a mist that presently he saw the van of the
men of Gondor  approaching. Imrahil,  Prince of Dol Amroth, rode up and
drew
rein before them.
'What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan?' he cried.
'Thjoden King,' they answered. 'He is dead. But Jomer King now rides in
the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.'
Then the prince went from his horse, and knelt by the bier in honour of
the  king and  his  great onset; and  he wept. And  rising he looked then on
Jowyn and  was amazed. 'Surely,  here  is a  woman?' he said. 'Have even the
women of the Rohirrim come to war in our need?'
'Nay!  One only,'  they  answered.  'The Lady Jowyn is  she, sister  of
Jomer; and we knew naught of her riding  until this hour, and greatly we rue
it.'
Then the prince seeing her beauty, though her face  was pale  and cold,
touched her hand as he bent to look more  closely on her. 'Men of Rohan!' he
cried. 'Are there no leeches among you? She is hurt to the death  maybe, but
I deem that  she yet lives.' And  he held the bright-burnished vambrace that
was upon his arm before her cold tips, and behold! a little mist was laid on
it hardly to be seen.
'Haste now is needed,'  he said, and he sent one riding back swiftly to
the City to bring aid. But he bowing low to the fallen, bade  them farewell,
and mounting rode away into battle.
And now  the  fighting waxed furious on the fields of the Pelennor; and
the din of arms rose upon  high, with  the crying of men and the neighing of
horses. Horns were blown  and trumpets  were  braying, and  the                     mymakil    were
bellowing as they  were goaded to war. Under the south walls of the City the
footmen of Gondor now  drove against the legions  of Morgul that were  still
gathered there in strength. But the horsemen rode eastward to the succour of
Jomer:  H®rin the Tall Warden of  the Keys, and the Lord of  Lossarnach, and
Hirluin of the Green Hills, and Prince Imrahil the fair with his knights all
about him.
Not too  soon came  their  aid to  the Rohirrim; for fortune had turned
against Jomer,  and his fury had betrayed him.  The great wrath of his onset
had  utterly  overthrown the front of  his enemies, and  great wedges of his
Riders had passed clear through  the ranks of  the  Southrons,  discomfiting
their  horsemen and riding their footmen to ruin.  But  wherever the                   mymakil
came  there the horses would not go, but  blenched and swerved away; and the
great  monsters were  unfought, and  stood  like towers of defence,  and the
Haradrim rallied about them. And if the Rohirrim at  their onset were thrice
outnumbered by  the Haradrim alone,  soon their case  became  worse; for new
strength came  now streaming to the field  out of  Osgiliath. There they had
been mustered for the sack of  the City and the rape of Gondor,  waiting  on
the call of their Captain. He  now was destroyed; but Gothmog the lieutenant
of  Morgul had flung them into the fray; Easterlings  with axes, and Variags
of  Khand. Southrons  in  scarlet, and  out  of Far  Harad  black  men  like
half-trolls with white eyes and red tongues. Some now hastened up behind the
Rohirrim, others  held westward to hold off the forces of Gondor and prevent
their joining with Rohan.
It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope
wavered that a new cry went up in the City, it being  then midmorning, and a
great wind blowing,  and the rain flying north, and the sun shining. In that
clear air watchmen on the walls saw afar a new sight of fear, and their last
hope left them.
For Anduin, from the bend at  the Harlond, so flowed that from the City
men  could look down it lengthwise for  some leagues,  and  the  far-sighted
could  see  any  ships  that  approached. And looking thither they cried  in
dismay; for black against the glittering stream they beheld a fleet borne up
on the wind: dromunds, and  ships  of great draught with many oars, and with
black sails bellying in the breeze.
'The Corsairs of Umbar!' men shouted. 'The Corsairs of Umbar! Look! The
Corsairs of Umbar  are  coming!  So  Belfalas is  taken, and the  Ethir, and
Lebennin is gone. The Corsairs are upon us! It is the last stroke of doom!'
And some without order, for none could he found to command them  in the
City,  ran to  the bells and tolled the alarm;  and  some blew the  trumpets
sounding the retreat. 'Back to the walls!' they  cried. 'Back to the  walls!
Come back to the City before all are overwhelmed!' But the  wind  that  sped
the ships blew all their clamour away.
The Rohirrim indeed had no  need  of news or  alarm.  All too well they
could  see for themselves the black sails. For Jomer was now scarcely a mile
from the Harlond, and a great press of  his first  foes was between  him and
the haven  there, while new  foes came swirling behind, cutting him off from
the Prince. Now he looked to the River,  and hope died in his heart, and the
wind  that he had blessed  he  now  called accursed. But the hosts of Mordor
were enheartened, and filled  with a new lust  and fury they came yelling to
the onset.
Stern now  was Jomer's mood, and  his mind clear again. He let blow the
horns to rally all men to his banner that could come thither; for he thought
to make a great shield-wall at the last, and stand, and  fight there on foot
till all fell, and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor, though no man
should be left in the West to remember the last King of the Mark. So he rode
