of  Morgul had flung them into the fray; Easterlings  with axes, and Variags
of  Khand. Southrons  in  scarlet, and  out  of Far  Harad  black  men  like
half-trolls with white eyes and red tongues. Some now hastened up behind the
Rohirrim, others  held westward to hold off the forces of Gondor and prevent
their joining with Rohan.
It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope
wavered that a new cry went up in the City, it being  then midmorning, and a
great wind blowing,  and the rain flying north, and the sun shining. In that
clear air watchmen on the walls saw afar a new sight of fear, and their last
hope left them.
For Anduin, from the bend at  the Harlond, so flowed that from the City
men  could look down it lengthwise for  some leagues,  and  the  far-sighted
could  see  any  ships  that  approached. And looking thither they cried  in
dismay; for black against the glittering stream they beheld a fleet borne up
on the wind: dromunds, and  ships  of great draught with many oars, and with
black sails bellying in the breeze.
'The Corsairs of Umbar!' men shouted. 'The Corsairs of Umbar! Look! The
Corsairs of Umbar  are  coming!  So  Belfalas is  taken, and the  Ethir, and
Lebennin is gone. The Corsairs are upon us! It is the last stroke of doom!'
And some without order, for none could he found to command them  in the
City,  ran to  the bells and tolled the alarm;  and  some blew the  trumpets
sounding the retreat. 'Back to the walls!' they  cried. 'Back to the  walls!
Come back to the City before all are overwhelmed!' But the  wind  that  sped
the ships blew all their clamour away.
The Rohirrim indeed had no  need  of news or  alarm.  All too well they
could  see for themselves the black sails. For Jomer was now scarcely a mile
from the Harlond, and a great press of  his first  foes was between  him and
the haven  there, while new  foes came swirling behind, cutting him off from
the Prince. Now he looked to the River,  and hope died in his heart, and the
wind  that he had blessed  he  now  called accursed. But the hosts of Mordor
were enheartened, and filled  with a new lust  and fury they came yelling to
the onset.
Stern now  was Jomer's mood, and  his mind clear again. He let blow the
horns to rally all men to his banner that could come thither; for he thought
to make a great shield-wall at the last, and stand, and  fight there on foot
till all fell, and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor, though no man
should be left in the West to remember the last King of the Mark. So he rode
to  a green hillock and  there  set  his banner,  and  the  White Horse  ran
rippling in the wind.
Out of doubt, out of dark to the day's rising
I came singing in the sun, sword unsheathing.
To hope's end I rode and to heart's breaking:
Now for wrath, now for ruin and a red nightfall!
These staves  he spoke, yet he laughed as  he  said them. For once more
lust of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was young, and
he was king:  the  lord  of a  fell  people. And lo! even  as he  laughed at
despair he looked  out  again on the black ships, and he lifted up his sword
to defy them.
And then wonder took him, and a great joy; and he cast  his sword up in
the sunlight  and sang as he caught it. And all eyes followed his gaze,  and
behold!  upon  the  foremost  ship  a great  standard  broke,  and the  wind
displayed it as she turned towards the Harlond. There flowered a White Tree,
and that  was for Gondor; but Seven Stars were  about it,  and  a high crown
above it,  the  signs of  Elendil  that no lord had  borne  for years beyond
count. And the  stars flamed in the  sunlight, for they were wrought of gems
by Arwen daughter of Elrond; and the crown was bright in the morning, for it
was wrought of mithril and gold.
Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elessar, Isildur's heir, out  of the
Paths of the Dead, borne upon a wind from the Sea to the  kingdom of Gondor;
and the mirth  of the Rohirrim was a  torrent  of laughter and a flashing of
swords, and the  joy and wonder of the  City  was a music of trumpets and  a
ringing of bells. But the hosts of Mordor were seized with bewilderment, and
a  great  wizardry  it seemed to  them that their own ships should be filled
with their foes; and a black dread  fell on them, knowing  that the tides of
fate had turned against them and their doom was at hand.
East rode the  knights of  Dol Amroth driving the  enemy  before  them:
troll-men and Variags  and orcs that hated  the sunlight. South strode Jomer
and men fled  before his face, and  they were caught between the  hammer and
the anvil. For now men leaped from the ships to the quays of the Harlond and
swept north like  a storm. There  came Legolas, and  Gimli wielding his axe,
and Halbarad with the standard, and Elladan  and Elrohir with stars on their
brow,  and the  dour-handed D®nedain, Rangers of the North,  leading a great
valour of the folk of Lebennin  and Lamedon and  the fiefs of the South. But
before all went Aragorn with the Flame of the West, And®ril  like a new fire
kindled, Narsil  re-forged  as deadly as of old: and upon his  brow  was the
Star of Elendil.
And so at length Jomer and Aragorn met in  the midst of the battle, and
they leaned on their swords and looked on one another and were glad.
'Thus we  meet again, though  all the hosts of Mordor lay between  us,'
said Aragorn. 'Did I not say so at the Hornburg?'
'So you spoke,' said Jomer, 'but hope oft deceives, and I knew not then
that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for, and
never was a meeting of friends more joyful.' And they  clasped hand in hand.
'Nor  indeed more timely,'  said Jomer. 'You come none too soon,  my friend.
Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.'
'Then let us avenge it, ere  we speak  of it!'  said Aragorn,  and they
rode back to battle together.
Hard  fighting and long  labour they had  still; for the Southrons were
bold  men and grim, and fierce in despair; and  the Easterlings  were strong
and war-hardened and asked for no quarter. And so in this place and that, by
burned  homestead or  barn,  upon hillock or mound, under wall or on  field,
still they gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away.
Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with
a great  burning, so  that  the hills and the mountains were  dyed  as  with
blood; fire  glowed in  the  River, and the grass of the Pelennor lay red in
the nightfall. And in that hour the great Battle of  the field of Gondor was
over; and not one living foe was left within  the circuit of the Rammas. All
were slain  save those who fled  to die, or to drown  in the red foam of the
River. Few ever came  eastward to Morgul or Mordor; and  to the land of  the
Haradrim came only a tale from far off: a rumour of  the wrath and terror of
Gondor.
Aragorn and  Jomer and Imrahil rode back towards  the Gate of the City,
and they  were now weary beyond joy  or sorrow. These three were  unscathed,
for such was their  fortune and the skill  and might of their  arms, and few
indeed had dared  to abide them or  look on their faces in the hour of their
wrath. But many others were hurt or  maimed or dead upon the field. The axes
hewed Forlong  as he fought  alone and unhorsed; and both Duilin of Morthond
and his  brother  were  trampled  to death  when they assailed the                   mymakil    ,
leading  their  bowmen  close  to shoot at the eyes of the monsters. Neither
Hirluin the  fair would return to Pinnath Gelin, nor Grimbold  to Grimslade,
nor Halbarad  to  the Northlands,  dour-handed  Ranger.  No few  had fallen,
