kindled, Narsil  re-forged  as deadly as of old: and upon his  brow  was the
Star of Elendil.
And so at length Jomer and Aragorn met in  the midst of the battle, and
they leaned on their swords and looked on one another and were glad.
'Thus we  meet again, though  all the hosts of Mordor lay between  us,'
said Aragorn. 'Did I not say so at the Hornburg?'
'So you spoke,' said Jomer, 'but hope oft deceives, and I knew not then
that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for, and
never was a meeting of friends more joyful.' And they  clasped hand in hand.
'Nor  indeed more timely,'  said Jomer. 'You come none too soon,  my friend.
Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.'
'Then let us avenge it, ere  we speak  of it!'  said Aragorn,  and they
rode back to battle together.
Hard  fighting and long  labour they had  still; for the Southrons were
bold  men and grim, and fierce in despair; and  the Easterlings  were strong
and war-hardened and asked for no quarter. And so in this place and that, by
burned  homestead or  barn,  upon hillock or mound, under wall or on  field,
still they gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away.
Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with
a great  burning, so  that  the hills and the mountains were  dyed  as  with
blood; fire  glowed in  the  River, and the grass of the Pelennor lay red in
the nightfall. And in that hour the great Battle of  the field of Gondor was
over; and not one living foe was left within  the circuit of the Rammas. All
were slain  save those who fled  to die, or to drown  in the red foam of the
River. Few ever came  eastward to Morgul or Mordor; and  to the land of  the
Haradrim came only a tale from far off: a rumour of  the wrath and terror of
Gondor.
Aragorn and  Jomer and Imrahil rode back towards  the Gate of the City,
and they  were now weary beyond joy  or sorrow. These three were  unscathed,
for such was their  fortune and the skill  and might of their  arms, and few
indeed had dared  to abide them or  look on their faces in the hour of their
wrath. But many others were hurt or  maimed or dead upon the field. The axes
hewed Forlong  as he fought  alone and unhorsed; and both Duilin of Morthond
and his  brother  were  trampled  to death  when they assailed the                   mymakil    ,
leading  their  bowmen  close  to shoot at the eyes of the monsters. Neither
Hirluin the  fair would return to Pinnath Gelin, nor Grimbold  to Grimslade,
nor Halbarad  to  the Northlands,  dour-handed  Ranger.  No few  had fallen,
renowned or nameless, captain or  soldier; for it was a great battle and the
full count of it  no tale has told. So long afterward a maker in Rohan  said
in his song of the Mounds of Mundburg:
We heard of the horns in the hills ringing,
the swords shining in the South-kingdom.
Steeds went striding to the Stoningland
as wind in the morning. War was kindled.
There Thjoden fell, Thengling mighty,
to his golden halls and green pastures
in the Northern fields never returning,
high lord of the host. Harding and Guthlbf
D®nhere and Djorwine, doughty Grimbold,
Herefara and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred,
fought and fell there in a far country:
in the Mounds of Mundburg under mould they lie
with their league-fellows, lords of Gondor.
Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea,
nor Forlong the old to the flowering vales
ever, to Arnach, to his own country
returned in triumph; nor the tall bowmen,
Derufin and Duilin, to their dark waters,
meres of Morthond under mountain-shadows.
Death in the morning and at day's ending
lords took and lowly. Long now they sleep
under grass in Gondor by the Great River.
Grey now as tears, gleaming silver,
red then it rolled, roaring water:
foam dyed with blood flamed at sunset;
as beacons mountains burned at evening;
red fell the dew in Rammas Echor.
Chapter 7. The Pyre of Denethor
When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless.
But Pippin rose to his  feet, as if a great weight had been lifted from him;
and  he stood listening to  the horns, and it seemed to  him that they would
break his  heart  with joy. And  never in after years could  he  hear a horn
blown in the distance  without tears starting in  his eyes. But now suddenly
his errand  returned  to  his memory,  and  he  ran forward.  At that moment
Gandalf stirred and spoke to Shadowfax, and was  about to  ride through  the
Gate.
'Gandalf, Gandalf! ' cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted.
'What are you  doing here?'  said Gandalf. 'Is it not a law in the City
that  those who  wear the black and  silver must stay in the Citadel, unless
their lord gives them leave?'
'He has,' said Pippin. 'He sent me away. But I am frightened. Something
terrible may happen up  there. The  Lord is  out of his  mind, I think. I am
afraid he will kill himself, and kill Faramir too. Can't you do something?'
Gandalf looked through the  gaping  Gate, and already  on the fields he
heard the gathering sound of  battle. He clenched his  hand. 'I must go ' he
said. 'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet  bring ruin on  us. I have
no time.'
'But Faramir!' cried Pippin.  'He is  not dead, and they will  burn him
alive, if someone does not stop them.'
'Burn him alive?' said Gandalf. 'What is this tale? Be quick!'
'Denethor  has gone  to  the  Tombs,'  said Pippin, 'and  he has  taken
Faramir, and  he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and they are
to make a pyre and  burn him on it, and Faramir as well. And he has sent men
to fetch  wood and  oil.  And I have told Beregond, but I'm afraid  he won't
dare  to  leave his post: he is on  guard. And what can  he  do  anyway?' So
Pippin poured out  his tale, reaching up  and  touching  Gandalf's knee with
trembling hands. 'Can't you save Faramir?'
'Maybe I can,' said Gandalf;  'but  if  I do, then  others will die,  I
fear. Well, I must come, since no  other  help can  reach  him. But evil and
sorrow will come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy  has
power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.'
