Chapter 7. The Pyre of Denethor
When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless.
But Pippin rose to his  feet, as if a great weight had been lifted from him;
and  he stood listening to  the horns, and it seemed to  him that they would
break his  heart  with joy. And  never in after years could  he  hear a horn
blown in the distance  without tears starting in  his eyes. But now suddenly
his errand  returned  to  his memory,  and  he  ran forward.  At that moment
Gandalf stirred and spoke to Shadowfax, and was  about to  ride through  the
Gate.
'Gandalf, Gandalf! ' cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted.
'What are you  doing here?'  said Gandalf. 'Is it not a law in the City
that  those who  wear the black and  silver must stay in the Citadel, unless
their lord gives them leave?'
'He has,' said Pippin. 'He sent me away. But I am frightened. Something
terrible may happen up  there. The  Lord is  out of his  mind, I think. I am
afraid he will kill himself, and kill Faramir too. Can't you do something?'
Gandalf looked through the  gaping  Gate, and already  on the fields he
heard the gathering sound of  battle. He clenched his  hand. 'I must go ' he
said. 'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet  bring ruin on  us. I have
no time.'
'But Faramir!' cried Pippin.  'He is  not dead, and they will  burn him
alive, if someone does not stop them.'
'Burn him alive?' said Gandalf. 'What is this tale? Be quick!'
'Denethor  has gone  to  the  Tombs,'  said Pippin, 'and  he has  taken
Faramir, and  he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and they are
to make a pyre and  burn him on it, and Faramir as well. And he has sent men
to fetch  wood and  oil.  And I have told Beregond, but I'm afraid  he won't
dare  to  leave his post: he is on  guard. And what can  he  do  anyway?' So
Pippin poured out  his tale, reaching up  and  touching  Gandalf's knee with
trembling hands. 'Can't you save Faramir?'
'Maybe I can,' said Gandalf;  'but  if  I do, then  others will die,  I
fear. Well, I must come, since no  other  help can  reach  him. But evil and
sorrow will come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy  has
power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.'
Then  having made up  his mind he acted swiftly; and catching up Pippin
and setting him before him, he turned Shadowfax with a word. Up the climbing
streets of Minas  Tirith they clattered, while the noise of  war rose behind
them. Everywhere men were rising from their despair and dread, seizing their
weapons, crying  one to another: 'Rohan  has come!'  Captains were shouting,
companies were mustering; many already were marching down to the Gate.
They  met  the Prince Imrahil,  and  he called  to them: 'Whither  now,
Mithrandir?  The Rohirrim are  fighting  on  the  fields  of Gondor! We must
gather all the strength that we can find.'
'You will need every man and more,' said  Gandalf.  'Make  all haste. I
will come when I can. But I  have  an errand to the  Lord Denethor that will
not wait. Take command in the Lord's absence!'
They passed on; and  as they climbed and drew near to the Citadel  they
felt the wind blowing in their faces, and they caught the glimmer of morning
far away, a light growing in the southern sky. But it brought little hope to
them, not knowing what evil lay before them, fearing to come too late.
'Darkness is passing,' said Gandalf, 'but it still lies heavy  on  this
City.'
At the  gate  of the  Citadel they found no guard.  'Then Beregond  has
gone,' said  Pippin  more hopefully. They turned away and hastened along the
road to  the Closed Door. It stood wide open,  and the porter lay before it.
He was slain and his key had been taken.
'Work of the Enemy!' said Gandalf. 'Such  deeds he loves: friend at war
with friend; loyalty divided in  confusion of hearts.' Now he dismounted and
bade  Shadowfax return to his stable. 'For, my friend,' he said, 'you and  I
should have ridden to  the fields long  ago, but other matters delay me. Yet
come swiftly if I call!'
They passed the Door  and walked on down the steep winding  road. Light
was  growing, and the tall columns and carven  figures beside the  way  went
slowly by like grey ghosts.
Suddenly the silence was broken,  and  they  heard below them cries and
the ringing of swords: such  sounds as had not been  heard in  the  hallowed
places since the building of  the City. At  last they came to Rath Dnnen and
hastened towards the  House of the Stewards,  looming in the  twilight under
its great dome.
'Stay!  Stay!'  cried Gandalf,  springing  forward  to the stone  stair
before the door. 'Stay this madness!'
For there were  the servants of  Denethor with  swords and  torches  in
their hands; but  alone in the  porch upon  the topmost step stood Beregond,
clad in the black and silver of  the  Guard;  and he held  the door  against
them. Two of them had already fallen to his sword, staining the hallows with
their blood;  and the others cursed  him, calling him outlaw and  traitor to
his master.
Even  as Gandalf and  Pippin  ran forward,  they heard from  within the
house of the dead  the voice of Denethor crying: 'Haste, haste! Do as I have
bidden!  Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?' Thereupon  the door
which Beregond held  shut  with  his left  hand was wrenched open, and there
behind him stood the Lord of the City, tall and fell; a light like flame was
in his eyes, and he held a drawn sword.
But Gandalf sprang up  the steps, and  the men fell  back from  him and
covered their eyes; for his  coming  was like the incoming of a  white light
into  a dark place, and he came with great anger. He lifted up his hand, and
in  the very stroke, the sword of Denethor flew  up and left  his  grasp and
fell  behind him in the shadows of the house; and  Denethor stepped backward
before Gandalf as one amazed.
'What is this, my lord?' said the wizard. 'The houses  of the  dead are
no  places for the living.  And why  do men  fight here in the  Hallows when
there  is  war enough before  the  Gate? Or has our  Enemy come even to Rath
Dnnen?'
'Since  when  has  the Lord  of  Gondor been answerable to thee?'  said
Denethor. 'Or may I not command my own servants?'
'You may,' said Gandalf.  'But others may contest your will, when it is
turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?'
'He lies  within,' said Denethor, 'burning, already burning. They  have
set a fire in his flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The  West has failed.
It shall  all  go up in a  great fire, and all shall be  ended. Ash! Ash and
smoke blown away on the wind!'
Then  Gandalf  seeing the madness  that was on  him feared that he  had
already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin
behind him, while Denethor gave back until he stood beside the table within.
But  there they found Faramir,  still dreaming in  his fever, lying upon the
table. Wood was piled under it, and high all about it, and all  was drenched
with oil, even the garments of Faramir and the coverlets; but as yet no fire
had been set to the fuel. Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in
