For there were  the servants of  Denethor with  swords and  torches  in
their hands; but  alone in the  porch upon  the topmost step stood Beregond,
clad in the black and silver of  the  Guard;  and he held  the door  against
them. Two of them had already fallen to his sword, staining the hallows with
their blood;  and the others cursed  him, calling him outlaw and  traitor to
his master.
Even  as Gandalf and  Pippin  ran forward,  they heard from  within the
house of the dead  the voice of Denethor crying: 'Haste, haste! Do as I have
bidden!  Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?' Thereupon  the door
which Beregond held  shut  with  his left  hand was wrenched open, and there
behind him stood the Lord of the City, tall and fell; a light like flame was
in his eyes, and he held a drawn sword.
But Gandalf sprang up  the steps, and  the men fell  back from  him and
covered their eyes; for his  coming  was like the incoming of a  white light
into  a dark place, and he came with great anger. He lifted up his hand, and
in  the very stroke, the sword of Denethor flew  up and left  his  grasp and
fell  behind him in the shadows of the house; and  Denethor stepped backward
before Gandalf as one amazed.
'What is this, my lord?' said the wizard. 'The houses  of the  dead are
no  places for the living.  And why  do men  fight here in the  Hallows when
there  is  war enough before  the  Gate? Or has our  Enemy come even to Rath
Dnnen?'
'Since  when  has  the Lord  of  Gondor been answerable to thee?'  said
Denethor. 'Or may I not command my own servants?'
'You may,' said Gandalf.  'But others may contest your will, when it is
turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?'
'He lies  within,' said Denethor, 'burning, already burning. They  have
set a fire in his flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The  West has failed.
It shall  all  go up in a  great fire, and all shall be  ended. Ash! Ash and
smoke blown away on the wind!'
Then  Gandalf  seeing the madness  that was on  him feared that he  had
already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin
behind him, while Denethor gave back until he stood beside the table within.
But  there they found Faramir,  still dreaming in  his fever, lying upon the
table. Wood was piled under it, and high all about it, and all  was drenched
with oil, even the garments of Faramir and the coverlets; but as yet no fire
had been set to the fuel. Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in
him; even as the light of  his  power was hidden under his  grey mantle.  He
leaped up on to the faggots, and raising the sick man lightly he sprang down
again, and bore him towards the door. But as he did  so  Faramir moaned  and
called on his father in his dream.
Denethor started as one waking from a trance, and the flame died in his
eyes,  and he wept; and he said: 'Do not take my son from me!  He calls  for
me.'
'He calls,' said Gandalf, 'but you cannot come to him yet.  For he must
seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe find it not. Whereas  your
part is to go out to  the battle of your City, where maybe death awaits you.
This you know in your heart.'
'He will not wake again,' said Denethor. 'Battle is vain. Why should we
wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by side?'
'Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of
your  death,'  answered  Gandalf.  'And only the  heathen  kings, under  the
domination of the Dark Power, did  thus,  slaying  themselves  in pride  and
despair, murdering their kin to ease their  own death.' Then passing through
the door he took  Faramir from the deadly house and laid him  on the bier on
which he had been brought, and which had now been set in the porch. Denethor
followed him, and  stood trembling,  looking with longing on the face of his
son. And for a moment, while all were silent and still, watching the Lord in
his throes, he wavered.
'Come!' said  Gandalf.  'We  are needed. There is much that you can yet
do.'
Then suddenly Denethor laughed. He stood up  tall  and proud again, and
stepping swiftly back to the table he lifted from it the pillow on which his
head  had lain.  Then coming to the  doorway he drew aside the covering, and
lo! he had between his hands  a          palantnr   . And as he held it up, it seemed to
those that  looked on that the  globe began to  glow with an inner flame, so
that the lean face of the Lord was lit as with a red fire, and it seemed cut
out of hard stone, sharp with black shadows, noble, proud, and terrible. His
eyes glittered.
'Pride and despair!' he cried.  'Didst thou  think that the eyes of the
White  Tower were blind? Nay, I have seen more than thou knowest, Grey
Fool.
For  thy hope is  but ignorance. Go then and labour in healing! Go forth and
fight! Vanity. For a little space you may triumph  on the field, for a  day.
But against the Power that now arises there is no victory. To this City only
the first finger of its hand has yet been stretched. All the East is moving.
And even now the  wind of thy  hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a  fleet
with black  sails. The West has failed. It is  time for all  to  depart  who
would not be slaves.'
'Such  counsels  will make the  Enemy's victory  certain  indeed,' said
Gandalf.
'Hope on then!' laughed Denethor. 'Do  I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy
hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne,  north, south, or
west. I  have read  thy  mind  and  its  policies.  Do I  not  know that you
commanded this halfling here to keep silence? That you brought him hither to
be a spy  within  my  very  chamber?  And yet  in our speech together I have
learned  the names and purpose of all thy companions. So! With the left hand
thou wouldst use me  for a little while as a shield against Mordor, and with
the right bring up this Ranger of the North to supplant me.
'But  I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not  be  thy tool! I am
Steward of the  House  of Anbrion.  I will not step  down  to be  the dotard
chamberlain of an upstart. Even  were his claim proved to me, still he comes
but of the line of Isildur. I will not bow to such a  one, last of  a ragged
house long bereft of lordship and dignity.'
'What then would  you have,' said Gandalf, 'if your will could have its
way?'
'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,' answered
Denethor,  'and in the days of  my  longfathers before me: to be the Lord of
this City in peace,  and leave my chair to  a son after me, who would be his
own master and no wizard's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will
have   naught   : neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.'
'To me it would  not seem that a Steward who  faithfully surrenders his
charge is diminished in love  or in honour,' said Gandalf. 'And at the least
you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is still in doubt.'
At those words Denethor's eyes flamed again, and taking the Stone under
his arm  he drew a knife and  strode towards the  bier. But  Beregond sprang
forward and set himself before Faramir.
'So!' cried Denethor. 'Thou hadst  already  stolen  half my son's love.
Now thou stealest the hearts of  my knights also, so that they rob me wholly
of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy  my will: to
rule my own end.'
