But against the Power that now arises there is no victory. To this City only
the first finger of its hand has yet been stretched. All the East is moving.
And even now the  wind of thy  hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a  fleet
with black  sails. The West has failed. It is  time for all  to  depart  who
would not be slaves.'
'Such  counsels  will make the  Enemy's victory  certain  indeed,' said
Gandalf.
'Hope on then!' laughed Denethor. 'Do  I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy
hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne,  north, south, or
west. I  have read  thy  mind  and  its  policies.  Do I  not  know that you
commanded this halfling here to keep silence? That you brought him hither to
be a spy  within  my  very  chamber?  And yet  in our speech together I have
learned  the names and purpose of all thy companions. So! With the left hand
thou wouldst use me  for a little while as a shield against Mordor, and with
the right bring up this Ranger of the North to supplant me.
'But  I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not  be  thy tool! I am
Steward of the  House  of Anbrion.  I will not step  down  to be  the dotard
chamberlain of an upstart. Even  were his claim proved to me, still he comes
but of the line of Isildur. I will not bow to such a  one, last of  a ragged
house long bereft of lordship and dignity.'
'What then would  you have,' said Gandalf, 'if your will could have its
way?'
'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,' answered
Denethor,  'and in the days of  my  longfathers before me: to be the Lord of
this City in peace,  and leave my chair to  a son after me, who would be his
own master and no wizard's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will
have   naught   : neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.'
'To me it would  not seem that a Steward who  faithfully surrenders his
charge is diminished in love  or in honour,' said Gandalf. 'And at the least
you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is still in doubt.'
At those words Denethor's eyes flamed again, and taking the Stone under
his arm  he drew a knife and  strode towards the  bier. But  Beregond sprang
forward and set himself before Faramir.
'So!' cried Denethor. 'Thou hadst  already  stolen  half my son's love.
Now thou stealest the hearts of  my knights also, so that they rob me wholly
of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy  my will: to
rule my own end.'
'Come  hither!'  he cried  to his servants. 'Come,  if you are  not all
recreant!'  Then two of them ran up the steps to  him. Swiftly he snatched a
torch from the hand of  one  and  sprang back into the house. Before Gandalf
could hinder him he  thrust the brand amid the fuel, and at once it crackled
and roared into flame.
Then Denethor  leaped upon  the  table, and  standing there wreathed in
fire and smoke he took up the staff  of his stewardship that lay at his feet
and broke  it on his  knee.  Casting the pieces into  the blaze he bowed and
laid himself  on  the table, clasping the         palantnr     with both hands upon  his
breast. And  it was said that ever after, if  any man  looked in that Stone,
unless he had a great strength of will to  turn it to other purpose, he  saw
only two aged hands withering in flame.
Gandalf in grief and horror turned his face away  and closed the  door.
For  a  while  he stood in thought,  silent  upon the threshold, while those
outside heard the greedy roaring of  the fire within. And then Denethor gave
a great cry, and afterwards spoke no more, nor was ever again seen by mortal
men.
'So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion,' said Gandalf: Then he turned to
Beregond and the Lord's servants that stood there aghast.  'And so pass also
the days of Gondor that you have known; for good or evil they are ended. Ill
deeds  have been done here; but let now  all enmity that lies between you be
put away, for  it  was contrived by the Enemy and works  his  will. You have
been  caught  in a net of warring duties that  you did not weave. But think,
you servants of the Lord, blind in your obedience, that but  for the treason
of Beregond Faramir, Captain of the White Tower, would now also be burned.
'Bear away  from this unhappy place your comrades who  have fallen. And
we  will bear  Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to  a place where he can sleep in
peace, or die if that be his doom.'
Then Gandalf and Beregond taking  up the bier bore  it away towards the
Houses of  Healing,  while behind them walked Pippin with downcast head.
But
the servants of the Lord  stood gazing as stricken  men  at the house of the
dead; and even  as Gandalf  came to the end of Rath Dnnen there was a  great
noise. Looking back  they  saw the  dome of the house crack and smokes issue
forth; and then with a rush and rumble of stone it fell in a flurry of fire;
but still unabated the flames danced and  flickered among the ruins. Then in
terror the servants fled and followed Gandalf.
At length they came back  to  the Steward's Door,  and  Beregond looked
with grief  at  the porter. 'This deed I  shall  ever rue,'  he said; 'but a
madness of haste was on  me, and he would not listen, but drew sword against
me.' Then  taking  the key that he had  wrested from the slain man he closed
the door and locked it.  'This should now be given to the Lord  Faramir,' he
said.
'The Prince  of Dol Amroth is in  command in the absence of  the Lord,'
said Gandalf; 'but since he is not here,  I must take this on  myself. I bid
you keep the key and guard it, until the City is set in order again.'
Now  at last they passed  into the high circles of the City, and in the
light of morning  they went their way towards  the  Houses  of Healing;  and
these were  fair houses set apart, for the care of those who were grievously
sick, but now  they were prepared  for the tending of men  hurt in battle or
dying. They stood not far from  the  Citadel-gate, in the sixth circle, nigh
to  its southward  wall, and about  them was a  garden and a greensward with
trees,  the only such place in the City. There dwelt the few women  that had
been permitted to remain in Minas Tirith, since they were skilled in healing
or in the service of the healers.
But even  as Gandalf and his companions came  carrying the bier  to the
main door of the  Houses, they heard a great cry that went up from the field
before the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the sky passed, and died
away on the wind. So terrible was the cry that for a moment all stood still,
and  yet when it  had passed, suddenly their hearts were lifted up in such a
hope as they had not known  since the darkness came  out of the East; and it
seemed  to them that  the  light grew  clear and the sun  broke  through the
clouds.
But Gandalf's  face was  grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and Pippin
to take  Faramir into the Houses  of Healing, he  went  up on  to  the walls
nearby; and there like a figure carven in white he stood  in the new sun and
looked out. And he beheld with the sight that was given to him all that  had
befallen; and when Jomer rode out from the forefront of his battle and stood
beside those who lay upon the field, he sighed, and he cast  his cloak about
him again,  and went  from  the  walls.  And Beregond  and  Pippin found him
standing in thought before the door of the Houses when they came out.
They looked at him, and for  a  while he was  silent. At last he spoke.
'My friends,' he  said, 'and all you people of this city and of the  Western
lands! Things of great sorrow and renown have come to pass. Shall we weep or
