At length they came back  to  the Steward's Door,  and  Beregond looked
with grief  at  the porter. 'This deed I  shall  ever rue,'  he said; 'but a
madness of haste was on  me, and he would not listen, but drew sword against
me.' Then  taking  the key that he had  wrested from the slain man he closed
the door and locked it.  'This should now be given to the Lord  Faramir,' he
said.
'The Prince  of Dol Amroth is in  command in the absence of  the Lord,'
said Gandalf; 'but since he is not here,  I must take this on  myself. I bid
you keep the key and guard it, until the City is set in order again.'
Now  at last they passed  into the high circles of the City, and in the
light of morning  they went their way towards  the  Houses  of Healing;  and
these were  fair houses set apart, for the care of those who were grievously
sick, but now  they were prepared  for the tending of men  hurt in battle or
dying. They stood not far from  the  Citadel-gate, in the sixth circle, nigh
to  its southward  wall, and about  them was a  garden and a greensward with
trees,  the only such place in the City. There dwelt the few women  that had
been permitted to remain in Minas Tirith, since they were skilled in healing
or in the service of the healers.
But even  as Gandalf and his companions came  carrying the bier  to the
main door of the  Houses, they heard a great cry that went up from the field
before the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the sky passed, and died
away on the wind. So terrible was the cry that for a moment all stood still,
and  yet when it  had passed, suddenly their hearts were lifted up in such a
hope as they had not known  since the darkness came  out of the East; and it
seemed  to them that  the  light grew  clear and the sun  broke  through the
clouds.
But Gandalf's  face was  grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and Pippin
to take  Faramir into the Houses  of Healing, he  went  up on  to  the walls
nearby; and there like a figure carven in white he stood  in the new sun and
looked out. And he beheld with the sight that was given to him all that  had
befallen; and when Jomer rode out from the forefront of his battle and stood
beside those who lay upon the field, he sighed, and he cast  his cloak about
him again,  and went  from  the  walls.  And Beregond  and  Pippin found him
standing in thought before the door of the Houses when they came out.
They looked at him, and for  a  while he was  silent. At last he spoke.
'My friends,' he  said, 'and all you people of this city and of the  Western
lands! Things of great sorrow and renown have come to pass. Shall we weep or
be glad? Beyond hope the Captain  of  our foes has been  destroyed,  and you
have heard the echo of his last despair. But he has not gone without woe and
bitter loss. And that I might have averted but for the madness of  Denethor.
So long  has the reach of our Enemy become! Alas! but now I perceive how his
will was able to enter into the very heart of the City.
'Though  the  Stewards  deemed  that  it  was  a secret  kept  only  by
themselves, long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower, one at least of
the Seven Seeing  Stones was preserved. In  the days of his  wisdom Denethor
did not presume to  use it,  nor to  challenge Sauron, knowing the limits of
his own strength. But his wisdom failed; and I fear that as the peril of his
realm grew he looked in the Stone and was deceived: far too often, I  guess,
since Boromir departed.  He was too great to  be subdued  to the will of the
Dark Power, he saw nonetheless only those things which  that Power permitted
him to see. The knowledge which he obtained was, doubtless, often of service
to  him; yet the vision of the great might  of Mordor that was  shown to him
fed the despair of his heart until it overthrew his mind.'
'Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!' said Pippin shuddering
at his memories as he spoke. 'The Lord went away from the room where
Faramir
lay; and it was only when  he  returned that I first thought he was changed,
old and broken.'
'It was  in the very hour  that  Faramir was brought to the Tower  that
many of us saw  a strange light in the topmost chamber,' said Beregond. 'But
we have  seen that light before, and it has  long been rumoured in the City,
that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought with his Enemy.'
'Alas!  then I  have guessed rightly,' said Gandalf. 'Thus  the will of
Sauron entered into Minas  Tirith; and thus  I  have  been delayed here. And
here I shall still be forced to remain, for I shall soon have other charges,
not Faramir only.
'Now I must go down to meet those  who come. I have seen  a  sight upon
the field that is very grievous to my heart, and greater sorrow may yet come
to  pass.  Come  with me, Pippin! But you,  Beregond,  should  return to the
Citadel and tell the chief of the Guard there what has befallen. It  will be
his duty, I fear, to withdraw you from the Guard; but  say to him that, if I
may give him counsel, you should be sent to the Houses of Healing, to be the
guard and servant of your captain, and to be at his side when he awakes - if
that shall ever be again. For by you  he  was saved from the fire. Go now! I
shall return soon.'
With  that  he  turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower
city. And even as they  hastened on their way the wind brought  a grey rain,
and all the fires sank, and there arose a great smoke before them.
