It  was  a  pleasant,  comfortable,  welcoming  place;  and he found himself
wishing  that he was really coming  here to settle down in quiet retirement.
It  seemed unfair  to have put his friends  to  all  this  trouble;  and  he
wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave
them so soon, indeed at  once. Yet that  would  have  to be  done  that very
night, before they all went to bed.
'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I  hardly feel that I  have
moved at all.'
The  travellers hung  up their  cloaks,  and piled  their packs  on the
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end.
Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.
'A bath!' cried Pippin. 'O blessed Meriadoc!'
'Which order  shall we  go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest  first, or quickest
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.'
'Trust me to arrange things  better than that!'  said Merry.  'We can't
begin life  at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are
three   tubs, and  a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats
and soap. Get inside, and be quick!'
Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage,
and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations  for  a late supper.
Snatches of competing songs came  from the bathroom mixed  with the sound
of
splashing and wallowing.  The voice of Pippin was  suddenly lifted up  above
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs.
Sing hey! for the bath at close of day
that washes the weary mud away!
A loon is he that will not sing:
O! Water Hot is a noble thing!
O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;
but better than rain or rippling streams
is Water Hot that smokes and steams.
O! Water cold we may pour at need
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;
but better is Beer, if drink we lack,
and Water Hot poured down the back.
O! Water is fair that leaps on high
in a fountain white beneath the sky;
but never did fountain sound so sweet
as splashing Hot Water with my feet!
There  was a terrific  splash, and  a  shout  of          Whoa!     from  Frodo. It
appeared that a lot of Pippin's  bath had imitated a fountain and leaped  on
high.
Merry went  to the door: 'What about supper and beer in the throat?' he
called. Frodo came out drying his hair.
'There's so much  water  in the air that I'm coming into the kitchen to
finish,' he said.
'Lawks!' said Merry, looking  in. The  stone floor  was swimming.  'You
ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat. Peregrin,' he said.
'Hurry up, or we shan't wait for you.'
They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose you
three won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope.
'Yes we shall!' cried Pippin.
'They're mine!'  said Frodo. 'Given to         me   by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among
farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.'
Hobbits have a passion  for mushrooms,  surpassing  even  the greediest
likings  of Big  People.  A  fact  which  partly explains young Frodo's long
expeditions  to  the renowned fields of the Marish,  and the  wrath  of  the
injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to
hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they
had  finished even Fatty Bolger heaved  a sigh  of content. They pushed back
the table, and drew chairs round the fire.
'We'll clear up later,' said Merry. 'Now tell me all  about it! I guess
that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. I
want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with
old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was
scared,   if that is possible.'
'We  have all been  scared,' said Pippin after a pause,  in which Frodo
stared at the fire and did not speak. 'You would have been,  too, if you had
been chased for two days by Black Riders.'
'And what are they?'
'Black figures  riding  on black horses,'  answered Pippin.  'If  Frodo
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave
a  full account of their journey from the time  when they left Hobbiton. Sam
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.
'I should  think you were making it all up,'  said Merry, 'if I had not
seen  that black shape on  the landing-stage - and heard the queer  sound in
Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?'
'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come
for  him to open  out. So far we have been given nothing  more to go on than
Farmer  Maggot's  guess  that  it  has  something  to  do  with  old Bilbo's
treasure.'
'That  was  only  a  guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does  not               know
anything.'
'Old Maggot is  a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind his
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go
into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good
many  strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think
his guess good or bad.'
'I  think,'  answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as  far as
it  goes. There    is a  connexion with Bilbo's  old adventures,  and the Riders
are looking,  or perhaps one  ought to say             searching,     for him or for me. I
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not
safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if
he was afraid  they would  suddenly give  way.  The others looked at him  in
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves.
'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded.
'Well!' said Frodo at  last, sitting  up and straightening his back, as
if he had made  a  decision.  'I can't keep it dark any  longer.  I have got
something to tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin.'
'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of
it myself.'
'What do you mean?' said  Frodo, looking  at him anxiously. 'Just this,
my  dear old  Frodo: you  are miserable, because you don't know how  to  say
good-bye.  You  meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come  on
you sooner  than you expected, and now you are  making up your mind to go at
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you.'
Frodo opened his mouth  and shut it again. His  look of surprise was so
