shall return soon.'
With  that  he  turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower
city. And even as they  hastened on their way the wind brought  a grey rain,
and all the fires sank, and there arose a great smoke before them.
Chapter 8. The Houses of Healing
A mist was in Merry's eyes of tears  and weariness when they  drew near
the  ruined  Gate of  Minas Tirith. He gave  little  heed to the  wreck  and
slaughter that lay about all. Fire and smoke and  stench was in the air; for
many engines  had been burned  or cast into  the fire-pits, and many  of the
slain also, while here  and there lay  many  carcases of the great  Southron
monsters, half-burned, or broken by stone-cast, or shot through  the eyes by
the  valiant archers of Morthond. The flying rain had ceased for a time, and
the sun  gleamed  up above;  but all the lower city  was still  wrapped in a
smouldering reek.
Already men were labouring to clear a way through the jetsam of battle;
and now out from the Gate came some bearing litters. Gently  they laid Jowyn
upon soft pillows; but the king's body  they covered  with a great  cloth of
gold,  and  they bore  torches about  him, and  their flames,  pale  in  the
sunlight, were fluttered by the wind.
So Thjoden and Jowyn came  to  the City of Gondor, and all who saw them
bared their heads and bowed; and they passed through the ash and fume of the
burned circle, and went on and up  along the  streets of stone. To Merry the
ascent seemed  agelong,  a  meaningless journey in a hateful dream, going on
and on to some dim ending that memory cannot seize.
Slowly the  lights of  the torches in front of  him flickered  and went
out,  and he was walking in  a darkness; and he  thought: 'This  is a tunnel
leading to a tomb; there we shall stay forever.' But suddenly into his dream
there fell a living voice.
'Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you!'
He looked up  and the mist before his eyes  cleared a little. There was
Pippin! They were face  to face in a narrow lane,  and but for themselves it
was empty. He rubbed his eyes.
'Where is the  king?' he said.  'And Jowyn?' Then he stumbled  and  sat
down on a doorstep and began to weep again.
'They have gone up  into the Citadel,'  said  Pippin. 'I think you must
have fallen  asleep on your  feet and taken the wrong turning. When we found
that you were  not  with them,  Gandalf sent me to  look  for you.  Poor old
Merry! How glad  I am to see you again!  But  you are worn out, and  I won't
bother you with any talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?'
'No,' said Merry. 'Well, no, I don't think so. But I can't use my right
arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed  him.  And my  sword burned all away like a
piece of wood.'
Pippin's face was anxious. 'Well, you had better come with me  as quick
as you can,' he said. 'I wish I could carry you. You aren't fit to walk  any
further. They shouldn't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them.
So  many dreadful things have  happened  in the  City, Merry, that  one poor
hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.'
'It's not  always  a misfortune being overlooked,' said Merry.  'I  was
overlooked just now by - no, no, I can't speak of it.  Help me, Pippin! It's
all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.'
'Lean on me, Merry lad!' said Pippin. 'Come now! Foot by foot. It's not
far.'
'Are you going to bury me?' said Merry.
'No, indeed!' said Pippin, trying  to sound cheerful, though  his heart
was wrung with fear and pity. 'No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.'
They turned out of the lane that ran  between tall houses and the outer
wall of the fourth circle, and they  regained the main street climbing up to
the Citadel. Step by step they  went, while Merry swayed and murmured as one
in sleep.
'I'll never  get him there,' thought  Pippin. 'Is there  no one to help
me? I can't leave him here.' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up
behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond's son.
'Hullo,  Bergil!' he  called.  'Where  are you going?  Glad to  see you
again, and still alive!'
'I am running errands for the Healers,' said Bergil. 'I cannot stay.'
'Don't!'  said  Pippin.  'But  tell  them up  there that I have a  sick
hobbit, a   perian     mind you, come from the battle-field. I don't think he can
walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.' Bergil
ran on.
'I'd better wait here,'  thought  Pippin. So he let Merry  sink  gently
down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight,  and then he sat down beside
him, laying Merry's head  in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and
took his friend's hands in his own. The right hand felt icy to the touch.
It was  not long  before Gandalf himself  came  in  search  of them. He
stooped over Merry and caressed  his brow; then he lifted him carefully. 'He
