bother you with any talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?'
'No,' said Merry. 'Well, no, I don't think so. But I can't use my right
arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed  him.  And my  sword burned all away like a
piece of wood.'
Pippin's face was anxious. 'Well, you had better come with me  as quick
as you can,' he said. 'I wish I could carry you. You aren't fit to walk  any
further. They shouldn't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them.
So  many dreadful things have  happened  in the  City, Merry, that  one poor
hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.'
'It's not  always  a misfortune being overlooked,' said Merry.  'I  was
overlooked just now by - no, no, I can't speak of it.  Help me, Pippin! It's
all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.'
'Lean on me, Merry lad!' said Pippin. 'Come now! Foot by foot. It's not
far.'
'Are you going to bury me?' said Merry.
'No, indeed!' said Pippin, trying  to sound cheerful, though  his heart
was wrung with fear and pity. 'No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.'
They turned out of the lane that ran  between tall houses and the outer
wall of the fourth circle, and they  regained the main street climbing up to
the Citadel. Step by step they  went, while Merry swayed and murmured as one
in sleep.
'I'll never  get him there,' thought  Pippin. 'Is there  no one to help
me? I can't leave him here.' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up
behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond's son.
'Hullo,  Bergil!' he  called.  'Where  are you going?  Glad to  see you
again, and still alive!'
'I am running errands for the Healers,' said Bergil. 'I cannot stay.'
'Don't!'  said  Pippin.  'But  tell  them up  there that I have a  sick
hobbit, a   perian     mind you, come from the battle-field. I don't think he can
walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.' Bergil
ran on.
'I'd better wait here,'  thought  Pippin. So he let Merry  sink  gently
down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight,  and then he sat down beside
him, laying Merry's head  in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and
took his friend's hands in his own. The right hand felt icy to the touch.
It was  not long  before Gandalf himself  came  in  search  of them. He
stooped over Merry and caressed  his brow; then he lifted him carefully. 'He
should have  been  borne in  honour  into this city,' he said.  'He has well
repaid my trust; for  if Elrond had  not yielded to me, neither of you would
have  set  out; and then far more grievous would the  evils of this day have
been.' He sighed. 'And yet here is another charge on my hands, while all the
time the battle hangs in the balance.'
So at last  Faramir and  Jowyn and Meriadoc  were laid  in  beds in the
Houses of  Healing; and there they were tended well. For though all lore was
in  these latter days fallen  from its  fullness  of old, the  leechcraft of
Gondor was still wise, and skilled in the healing of wound and hurt, and all
such  sickness as east of  the Sea mortal men  were subject to. Save old age
only. For that  they had  found no  cure; and indeed the span of their lives
had now waned to little more than that of  other men, and those  among  them
who passed the tale of  five score years with vigour were grown few, save in
some houses of purer blood.  But now their art and  knowledge were  baffled;
for there  were  many sick of a malady that  would not  be healed; and  they
called it the Black Shadow, for it came from the Nazgyl.  And those who were
stricken with it fell slowly into an ever deeper  dream, and  then passed to
silence and a deadly cold, and so died. And it seemed to the tenders  of the
sick that on the Halfling and  on the Lady of Rohan this malady lay heavily.
Still  at whiles as  the  morning wore away  they would speak,  murmuring in
their  dreams; and  the  watchers  listened  to all that  they said,  hoping
perhaps  to learn something that  would help them to understand their hurts.
But  soon they  began to fall down into the darkness, and as the sun  turned
west a  grey shadow crept over  their faces. But Faramir burned with a fever
that would not abate.
Gandalf  went  from one to the other full of care, and he was told  all
that the watchers could hear. And so  the day passed, while the great battle
outside went on with shifting  hopes and strange  tidings; and still Gandalf
waited and watched and did not  go forth; till at last the red sunset filled
all the sky, and the light through the windows fell on the grey faces of the
sick.  Then  it seemed to those  who  stood by that  in the glow  the  faces
flushed softly as with health returning, but it was only a mockery of hope.
Then an old  wife, Ioreth, the eldest  of the women who  served in that
house, looking on the fair  face  of Faramir, wept, for all the people loved
him. And  she said: 'Alas! if he should die. Would that there  were kings in
Gondor, as there were once  upon a time,  they  say! For  it is said in  old
lore:  The hands of the king  are  the hands of a healer             . And so the rightful
king could ever be known.'
And Gandalf,  who  stood by, said:  'Men  may long remember your words,
Ioreth! For  there  is hope  in them. Maybe a king has  indeed  returned  to
Gondor; or  have  you not  heard the strange tidings that  have come to  the
City?'
'I  have been  too busy with this and that  to  heed all the crying and
shouting,' she answered. 'All  I hope is that those murdering devils  do not
come to this House and trouble the sick.'
Then Gandalf went  out in haste, and already  the fire  in  the sky was
burning out, and the smouldering  hills were  fading, while ash-grey evening
crept over the fields.
Now  as  the sun went down  Aragorn and Jomer and Imrahil drew near the
City  with their captains and knights; and  when they came  before the  Gate
Aragorn said:
'Behold the  Sun setting in  a  great fire! It is a sign of the end and
fall of many things, and a change in the tides of  the world.  But this City
and realm has rested in the charge of the  Stewards for many long years, and
I  fear that if I enter it unbidden, then doubt and debate may  arise, which
should not be while this war is  fought.  I will not enter in, nor  make any
claim, until  it be seen whether we or Mordor shall prevail. Men shall pitch
my tents upon  the field,  and here  I will await the welcome of the Lord of
the City.'
But Jomer  said: 'Already you have raised the banner  of the Kings  and
displayed  the  tokens  of  Elendil's  House.  Will you suffer  these to  be
challenged?'
'No,' said Aragorn. 'But I deem the time unripe; and I have no mind for
strife except with our Enemy and his servants.'
And the Prince  Imrahil said. Your words, lord, are wise, if one who is
a kinsman of  the  Lord Denethor  may counsel  you  in  this  matter. He  is
strong-willed  and proud, but old; and  his mood has been strange  since his
son was stricken down. Yet I would not have  you remain like a beggar at the
door.'
'Not  a beggar,' said Aragorn. 'Say a captain  of the Rangers, who  are
unused to  cities and  houses of  stone.' And he commanded  that  his banner
should be furled;  and he did off the Star of the  North Kingdom and gave it
to the keeping of the sons of Elrond.
Then the Prince Imrahil and Jomer of Rohan left him and passed  through
