king could ever be known.'
And Gandalf,  who  stood by, said:  'Men  may long remember your words,
Ioreth! For  there  is hope  in them. Maybe a king has  indeed  returned  to
Gondor; or  have  you not  heard the strange tidings that  have come to  the
City?'
'I  have been  too busy with this and that  to  heed all the crying and
shouting,' she answered. 'All  I hope is that those murdering devils  do not
come to this House and trouble the sick.'
Then Gandalf went  out in haste, and already  the fire  in  the sky was
burning out, and the smouldering  hills were  fading, while ash-grey evening
crept over the fields.
Now  as  the sun went down  Aragorn and Jomer and Imrahil drew near the
City  with their captains and knights; and  when they came  before the  Gate
Aragorn said:
'Behold the  Sun setting in  a  great fire! It is a sign of the end and
fall of many things, and a change in the tides of  the world.  But this City
and realm has rested in the charge of the  Stewards for many long years, and
I  fear that if I enter it unbidden, then doubt and debate may  arise, which
should not be while this war is  fought.  I will not enter in, nor  make any
claim, until  it be seen whether we or Mordor shall prevail. Men shall pitch
my tents upon  the field,  and here  I will await the welcome of the Lord of
the City.'
But Jomer  said: 'Already you have raised the banner  of the Kings  and
displayed  the  tokens  of  Elendil's  House.  Will you suffer  these to  be
challenged?'
'No,' said Aragorn. 'But I deem the time unripe; and I have no mind for
strife except with our Enemy and his servants.'
And the Prince  Imrahil said. Your words, lord, are wise, if one who is
a kinsman of  the  Lord Denethor  may counsel  you  in  this  matter. He  is
strong-willed  and proud, but old; and  his mood has been strange  since his
son was stricken down. Yet I would not have  you remain like a beggar at the
door.'
'Not  a beggar,' said Aragorn. 'Say a captain  of the Rangers, who  are
unused to  cities and  houses of  stone.' And he commanded  that  his banner
should be furled;  and he did off the Star of the  North Kingdom and gave it
to the keeping of the sons of Elrond.
Then the Prince Imrahil and Jomer of Rohan left him and passed  through
the City and the tumult of the people,  and mounted to the Citadel; and they
came to the Hall of the Tower, seeking the Steward. But they found his chair
empty, and before the dais lay Thjoden King of the Mark upon a bed of state;
and twelve torches stood about it, and twelve  guards, knights both of Rohan
and Gondor. And the hangings  of  the bed were of  green and white, but upon
the king  was laid the great cloth  of gold up  to his breast, and upon that
his  unsheathed sword, and at his  feet his shield, The light of the torches
shimmered in  his  white hair like  sun in the spray of a fountain,  but his
face  was fair  and young, save that  a peace lay on it beyond the reach  of
youth; and it seemed that he slept.
When they had stood silent  for a time  beside  the king, Imrahil said:
'Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?'
And one of the guards answered: 'The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses
of Healing.'
But  Jomer said: 'Where is the  Lady Jowyn,  my sister; for surely  she
should be lying beside the  king, and  in no  less  honour? Where  have they
bestowed her?'
And Imrahil said: 'But the Lady Jowyn was yet living when they bore her
hither. Did you not know?'
Then hope unlooked-for came so  suddenly to Jomer's  heart, and with it
the bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but turned and went
swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him. And when they came forth
evening had fallen and many stars were in the sky. And there came Gandalf on
foot and with him one cloaked in grey; and they met before the doors of  the
Houses of Healing. And they greeted Gandalf and said: 'We  seek the Steward,
and men say that  he is in  this House.  Has any hurt befallen him? And  the
Lady Jowyn, where is she?'
And Gandalf answered: 'She lies  within and is not  dead, but  is  near
death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart,  as you have heard,
and he  is  now the Steward; for Denethor has departed, and his house is  in
ashes.' And they were filled with grief and wonder at the tale that he told.
But Imrahil  said: 'So victory is shorn of gladness,  and  it is bitter
bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their lords. Jomer
rules the Rohirrim. Who shall rule the City meanwhile? Shall we not send now
for the Lord Aragorn?'
And the cloaked man spoke and said:  'He is  come.' And they saw  as he
stepped  into the  light of  the lantern  by the  door that  it was Aragorn,
wrapped in the grey cloak  of  Lurien above his mail, and bearing  no  other
token  than the green stone of Galadriel. 'I  have come because Gandalf begs
me  to do so,'  he  said. 'But for the present I am but the  Captain  of the
D®nedain of Arnor;  and the Lord  of  Dol Amroth  shall rule the City  until
Faramir awakes. But it is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us  all in the
days  that follow and in our  dealings with the Enemy.' And they agreed upon
that.
Then Gandalf  said:  'Let us not  stay  at the door,  for the  time  is
urgent. Let us enter! For  it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope
remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of
Gondor:     The hands of the  king are  the hands of a healer, and  so shall the
rightful king be known       .'
Then  Aragorn entered first and the  others followed. And there  at the
door were two guards in the  livery of the  Citadel: one tall, but the other
scarce the height of a boy; and when he saw them he cried  aloud in surprise
and joy.
'Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed  it was you in the black
ships. But  they were all  shouting          corsairs    and wouldn't listen to me. How
did you do it?'
Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. 'Well met indeed!' he
said. 'But there is not time yet for travellers' tales.'
But Imrahil said to Jomer: 'Is it  thus that we speak to our kings? Yet
maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!'
And Aragorn hearing  him,  turned and  said: 'Verily, for  in the  high
tongue of old I am       Elessar  , the  Elfstone  , and   Envinyatar    , the Renewer': and
he lifted from his breast the green stone that lay there. 'But Strider shall
be the name of my house, if that be ever established.  In the high tongue it
will not  sound  so ill,  and       Telcontar    I will be and all  the heirs  of my
body.'
And with that they passed into the House; and as  they went towards the
rooms  where the  sick were tended  Gandalf told of the deeds  of  Jowyn and
Meriadoc. 'For,' he said, 'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke
much in their dreaming, before they sank into  the deadly darkness. Also  it
is given to me to see many things far off.'
Aragorn  went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady Jowyn, and last to
Merry. When  he had looked on the faces of the sick  and seen their hurts he
sighed. 'Here I must  put forth all such power and skill as is given to me,'
