wrapped in the grey cloak  of  Lurien above his mail, and bearing  no  other
token  than the green stone of Galadriel. 'I  have come because Gandalf begs
me  to do so,'  he  said. 'But for the present I am but the  Captain  of the
D®nedain of Arnor;  and the Lord  of  Dol Amroth  shall rule the City  until
Faramir awakes. But it is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us  all in the
days  that follow and in our  dealings with the Enemy.' And they agreed upon
that.
Then Gandalf  said:  'Let us not  stay  at the door,  for the  time  is
urgent. Let us enter! For  it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope
remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of
Gondor:     The hands of the  king are  the hands of a healer, and  so shall the
rightful king be known       .'
Then  Aragorn entered first and the  others followed. And there  at the
door were two guards in the  livery of the  Citadel: one tall, but the other
scarce the height of a boy; and when he saw them he cried  aloud in surprise
and joy.
'Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed  it was you in the black
ships. But  they were all  shouting          corsairs    and wouldn't listen to me. How
did you do it?'
Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. 'Well met indeed!' he
said. 'But there is not time yet for travellers' tales.'
But Imrahil said to Jomer: 'Is it  thus that we speak to our kings? Yet
maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!'
And Aragorn hearing  him,  turned and  said: 'Verily, for  in the  high
tongue of old I am       Elessar  , the  Elfstone  , and   Envinyatar    , the Renewer': and
he lifted from his breast the green stone that lay there. 'But Strider shall
be the name of my house, if that be ever established.  In the high tongue it
will not  sound  so ill,  and       Telcontar    I will be and all  the heirs  of my
body.'
And with that they passed into the House; and as  they went towards the
rooms  where the  sick were tended  Gandalf told of the deeds  of  Jowyn and
Meriadoc. 'For,' he said, 'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke
much in their dreaming, before they sank into  the deadly darkness. Also  it
is given to me to see many things far off.'
Aragorn  went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady Jowyn, and last to
Merry. When  he had looked on the faces of the sick  and seen their hurts he
sighed. 'Here I must  put forth all such power and skill as is given to me,'
he said. 'Would that Elrond were here, for he is the eldest of all our race,
and has the greater power.'
And Jomer seeing  that he was sorrowful and weary said: 'First you must
rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?'
But Aragorn answered: 'Nay, for these three, and most soon for Faramir,
time is running out. All speed is needed.'
Then he called to Ioreth and he said: 'You have store  in this House of
the herbs of healing?'
'Yes, lord,' she answered; 'but not enough, I reckon, for all that will
need  them. But I am sure I  do  not know  where we shall find more; for all
things are amiss in these dreadful days, what with  fires and  burnings, and
the lads that run errands so few, and all the roads blocked. Why, it is days
out of count since ever a carrier came in from Lossarnach to the market! But
we do our best in this  House with what we have, as  I am sure your lordship
will know.'
'I will judge that when I see,' said Aragorn.  'One thing also is short
time for speech. Have you          athelas  ?'
'I do not know,  I am  sure, lord,' she answered, 'at least not by that
name. I will go and ask of the herb-master; he knows all the old names.'
'It is also called  kingsfoil  ,' said Aragorn; 'and maybe you  know it by
that name, for so the country-folk call it in these latter days.' 'Oh that!'
said Ioreth. 'Well, if your lordship had named it at first I could have told
you. No, we have none of it, I am sure. Why, I have  never heard that it had
any great virtue;  and indeed I  have often said to  my sisters when we came
upon it growing in the woods: "kingsfoil" I said, " 'tis a strange name, and
I  wonder why 'tis called so; for if I were a king, I would have plants more
bright in  my garden". Still it smells sweet  when bruised,  does it not? If
sweet is the right word: wholesome, maybe, is nearer.'
'Wholesome verily,' said Aragorn. 'And now,  dame, if you love the Lord
Faramir, run  as quick as your  tongue and get me kingsfoil, if  there  is a
leaf in the City.'
'And if  not,' said Gandalf, 'I  will  ride  to Lossarnach with  Ioreth
behind me, and she  shall take me to the woods, but not  to her sisters. And
Shadowfax shall show her the meaning of haste.'
When Ioreth was  gone, Aragorn bade the other  women to make water hot.
Then he took  Faramir's hand in  his, and laid the other hand  upon the sick
man's brow. It was drenched with sweat; but Faramir did not move or make any
sign, and seemed hardly to breathe.
'He is nearly spent,' said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. 'But  this comes
not from  the wound. See! that  is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart
of the Nazgyl,  as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was
given  by  some  Southron arrow,  I  would guess.  Who drew it forth? Was it
kept?'
'I drew it forth,'  said  Imrahil, 'and staunched the wound. But I  did
not keep the arrow, for we had much to  do. It was, as I remember, just such
a  dart as the Southrons use. Yet I  believed  that it came from the Shadows
above, for else his fever and sickness were not  to be understood; since the
wound was not deep or vital. How then do you read the matter?'
'Weariness,  grief for his father's  mood,  a  wound,  and over all the
Black Breath,' said  Aragorn.  'He is a man of  staunch will, for already he
had  come close  under  the Shadow  before  ever  he  rode to battle on  the
out-walls.  Slowly the dark must have crept  on  him,  even as he fought and
strove to hold his outpost. Would that I could have been here sooner!'
Thereupon the herb-master entered.  'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil,
as the rustics name it, he said; or        athelas   in the noble tongue, or to those
who know somewhat of the Valinorean. . .'
'I  do  so,'  said Aragorn, 'and I care  not  whether you say  now               asla
aranion    or  kingsfoil  , so long as you have some.'
'Your  pardon lord!' said the  man. 'I see  you  are a lore-master, not
merely  a captain of  war. But alas! sir, we do not keep  this  thing in the
Houses of Healing, where  only the  gravely hurt or sick  are tended. For it
has no virtue that we know of, save perhaps  to sweeten a fouled air, or  to
drive away  some passing  heaviness.  Unless,  of  course, you  give heed to
rhymes of old days which women such as our good Ioreth still repeat  without
understanding.
When the black breath blows
and death's shadow grows
and all lights pass,
come athelas! come athelas!
Life to the dying
In the king's hand lying!
It is but  a doggrel, I fear, garbled  in the  memory of old wives. Its
meaning I leave to your judgement, if indeed it has any. But  old folk still
use an infusion of the herb for headaches.'
