sign, and seemed hardly to breathe.
'He is nearly spent,' said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. 'But  this comes
not from  the wound. See! that  is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart
of the Nazgyl,  as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was
given  by  some  Southron arrow,  I  would guess.  Who drew it forth? Was it
kept?'
'I drew it forth,'  said  Imrahil, 'and staunched the wound. But I  did
not keep the arrow, for we had much to  do. It was, as I remember, just such
a  dart as the Southrons use. Yet I  believed  that it came from the Shadows
above, for else his fever and sickness were not  to be understood; since the
wound was not deep or vital. How then do you read the matter?'
'Weariness,  grief for his father's  mood,  a  wound,  and over all the
Black Breath,' said  Aragorn.  'He is a man of  staunch will, for already he
had  come close  under  the Shadow  before  ever  he  rode to battle on  the
out-walls.  Slowly the dark must have crept  on  him,  even as he fought and
strove to hold his outpost. Would that I could have been here sooner!'
Thereupon the herb-master entered.  'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil,
as the rustics name it, he said; or        athelas   in the noble tongue, or to those
who know somewhat of the Valinorean. . .'
'I  do  so,'  said Aragorn, 'and I care  not  whether you say  now               asla
aranion    or  kingsfoil  , so long as you have some.'
'Your  pardon lord!' said the  man. 'I see  you  are a lore-master, not
merely  a captain of  war. But alas! sir, we do not keep  this  thing in the
Houses of Healing, where  only the  gravely hurt or sick  are tended. For it
has no virtue that we know of, save perhaps  to sweeten a fouled air, or  to
drive away  some passing  heaviness.  Unless,  of  course, you  give heed to
rhymes of old days which women such as our good Ioreth still repeat  without
understanding.
When the black breath blows
and death's shadow grows
and all lights pass,
come athelas! come athelas!
Life to the dying
In the king's hand lying!
It is but  a doggrel, I fear, garbled  in the  memory of old wives. Its
meaning I leave to your judgement, if indeed it has any. But  old folk still
use an infusion of the herb for headaches.'
'Then in the name of the  king, go  and find some old man  of less lore
and more wisdom who keeps some in his house!' cried Gandalf.
Now  Aragorn knelt beside Faramir,  and held a hand  upon his brow. And
those that watched felt that some great struggle was going on. For Aragorn's
face  grew grey  with weariness; and ever and anon  he  called the  name  of
Faramir, but each time more faintly to their hearing, as  if Aragorn himself
was removed from them, and walked afar  in some dark vale,  calling  for one
that was lost.
And at last Bergil came running in, and he bore six  leaves in a cloth.
'It is kingsfoil,  Sir,' he  said; 'but not fresh, I fear. It must have been
culled two weeks ago at the least. I hope it will  serve, Sir?' Then looking
at Faramir he burst into tears.
But Aragorn smiled. 'It  will serve,' he said. 'The worst is  now over.
Stay and be comforted!'  Then taking two leaves,  he  laid them on his hands
and breathed on them,  and then  he crushed them, and straightway  a  living
freshness filled the room, as if the air itself awoke and tingled, sparkling
with joy. And then he cast the leaves into the bowls  of steaming water that
were brought  to  him,  and  at  once all hearts  were  lightened.  For  the
fragrance that came to each was like a memory of dewy mornings of
unshadowed
sun in some land of which the fair world in Spring is itself but  a fleeting
memory.  But  Aragorn  stood  up as one refreshed, and his eyes smiled as he
held a bowl before Faramir's dreaming face.
'Well now!  Who would have believed  it?'  said Ioreth to  a woman that
stood beside her. 'The weed is  better than I thought. It reminds me  of the
roses of Imloth Melui when I was a lass, and no king could ask for better.'
Suddenly Faramir  stirred, and he  opened  his eyes,  and he looked  on
Aragorn who  bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in
his  eyes, and he spoke softly. 'My  lord, you called  me. I come. What does
the king command?'
'Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!' said Aragorn. 'You are weary.
Rest a while, and take food, and be ready when I return.'
'I will, lord,' said Faramir. 'For who would lie idle when the king has
returned?'
'Farewell then  for a while!' said Aragorn.  'I must go  to  others who
need me.' And he left the chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil; but Beregond and
his son remained behind, unable to contain their joy. As he followed Gandalf
and shut the door Pippin heard Ioreth exclaim:
'King! Did you hear  that? What  did I say? The  hands  of  a healer, I
said.'  And  soon the word had  gone  out  from the House  that the king was
indeed  come among  them, and after war he brought healing; and the news ran
through the City.
But Aragorn came to Jowyn, and he said: 'Here there is a  grievous hurt
and a  heavy blow. The arm that  was broken  has been tended with due skill,
and it will  mend in time, if she  has  the  strength  to live:  It  is  the
shield-arm  that is maimed; but the chief evil comes through the  sword-arm.
In that there now seems no life, although it is unbroken.
'Alas! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her mind
or body. And those who  will take a weapon to such an enemy must  be sterner
than  steel,  if the very shock shall  not destroy them. It was an evil doom
that set her in his path. For she is a fair maiden, fairest  lady of a house
of queens. And yet I know not how I should speak of her. When I first looked
on her  and  perceived  her unhappiness, it seemed to me that I saw a  white
flower standing straight and proud, shapely as a lily, and yet knew  that it
was  hard, as if  wrought by elf-wrights out of steel. Or  was  it, maybe, a
frost that had turned  its sap to ice, and  so it stood, bitter-sweet, still
fair to see, but stricken, soon  to fall and die? Her malady begins far back
before this day, does it not, Jomer?'
'I marvel that you should  ask me,  lord,' he answered. 'For I hold you
blameless  in  this  matter, as in  all else; yet  I knew not that Jowyn, my
sister, was touched by any  frost, until  she first looked on you.  Care and
dread she had,  and shared with me, in the days of Wormtongue and the king's
bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring
her to this pass!'
'My friend,' said Gandalf,  'you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the
free fields; but she, born  in the body of a maid, had  a spirit and courage
at least the match of yours.  Yet  she  was doomed to wait  upon an old man,
whom she  loved as a father, and watch him falling  into a  mean dishonoured
dotage; and her part seemed to her more ignoble  than that  of the  staff he
leaned on.
'Think you that Wormtongue  had poison only for Thjoden's ears?                     Dotard!
What is the  house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands  drink  in the
reek, and their brats roll on the floor among their dogs?                Have you not heard
