and shut the door Pippin heard Ioreth exclaim:
'King! Did you hear  that? What  did I say? The  hands  of  a healer, I
said.'  And  soon the word had  gone  out  from the House  that the king was
indeed  come among  them, and after war he brought healing; and the news ran
through the City.
But Aragorn came to Jowyn, and he said: 'Here there is a  grievous hurt
and a  heavy blow. The arm that  was broken  has been tended with due skill,
and it will  mend in time, if she  has  the  strength  to live:  It  is  the
shield-arm  that is maimed; but the chief evil comes through the  sword-arm.
In that there now seems no life, although it is unbroken.
'Alas! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her mind
or body. And those who  will take a weapon to such an enemy must  be sterner
than  steel,  if the very shock shall  not destroy them. It was an evil doom
that set her in his path. For she is a fair maiden, fairest  lady of a house
of queens. And yet I know not how I should speak of her. When I first looked
on her  and  perceived  her unhappiness, it seemed to me that I saw a  white
flower standing straight and proud, shapely as a lily, and yet knew  that it
was  hard, as if  wrought by elf-wrights out of steel. Or  was  it, maybe, a
frost that had turned  its sap to ice, and  so it stood, bitter-sweet, still
fair to see, but stricken, soon  to fall and die? Her malady begins far back
before this day, does it not, Jomer?'
'I marvel that you should  ask me,  lord,' he answered. 'For I hold you
blameless  in  this  matter, as in  all else; yet  I knew not that Jowyn, my
sister, was touched by any  frost, until  she first looked on you.  Care and
dread she had,  and shared with me, in the days of Wormtongue and the king's
bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring
her to this pass!'
'My friend,' said Gandalf,  'you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the
free fields; but she, born  in the body of a maid, had  a spirit and courage
at least the match of yours.  Yet  she  was doomed to wait  upon an old man,
whom she  loved as a father, and watch him falling  into a  mean dishonoured
dotage; and her part seemed to her more ignoble  than that  of the  staff he
leaned on.
'Think you that Wormtongue  had poison only for Thjoden's ears?                     Dotard!
What is the  house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands  drink  in the
reek, and their brats roll on the floor among their dogs?                Have you not heard
those words before? Saruman spoke them, the teacher of Wormtongue. Though
I
do  not doubt that Wormtongue at home  wrapped their  meaning in terms
more
cunning. My lord,  if your sister's love for you, and her will still bent to
her duty, had not restrained her lips; you might have heard even such things
as these  escape them. But who knows what she spoke to  the darkness, alone,
in the bitter watches of the night, when all her  life seemed shrinking, and
the walls of her bower closing in  about her,  a hutch  to trammel some wild
thing in?'
Then Jomer was  silent, and looked on  his sister, as if pondering anew
all the days of their past life together. But Aragorn said: 'I saw also what
you saw,  Jomer. Few other  griefs amid the  ill  chances of this world have
more  bitterness and shame for a man's heart than  to  behold the  love of a
lady so fair and brave that cannot be returned Sorrow and pity have followed
me ever since I left her desperate in Dunharrow and rode to the Paths of the
Dead;  and no  fear upon  that way was so present as the fear for what might
befall her. And yet, Jomer, I  say to you that she loves you more truly than
me; for you she loves and knows; but  in me  she loves  only a shadow and  a
thought: a hope of glory and  great deeds, and lands far from  the fields of
Rohan.
'I have, maybe, the power to heal her body, and to recall  her from the
dark valley. But to what she will awake: hope, or forgetfulness, or despair,
I do  not know. And if to despair, then  she will die, unless  other healing
comes  which I cannot bring. Alas!  for  her  deeds have  set her among  the
queens of great renown.'
Then Aragorn stooped and looked in her face, and it was indeed white as
a lily, cold as frost, and hard as graven stone.  But he bent and kissed her
on the brow, and called her softly, saying:
'Jowyn Jomund's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!'
She did not stir,  but now she began again  to  breathe deeply, so that
her breast rose  and  fell  beneath the white linen of  the sheet. Once more
Aragorn bruised two leaves of           athelas   and cast them into steaming water; and
he laved her brow with it, and her right arm lying cold and nerveless on the
coverlet.
Then,  whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten  power of Westernesse,
or whether it was but his words  of the Lady Jowyn that  wrought on them, as
the sweet influence of the herb  stole about the chamber it seemed to  those
who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and it bore no scent,
but was an air wholly fresh  and  clean  and young, as if it had not  before
been  breathed  by any  living thing and came  new-made from snowy
mountains
high beneath a  dome of stars,  or from shores of silver far away  washed by
seas of foam.
'Awake, Jowyn, Lady of  Rohan!'  said  Aragorn again,  and he  took her
right hand in his and  felt it  warm with life returning. 'Awake! The shadow
is gone and all darkness is washed  clean!' Then he laid her hand in Jomer's
and  stepped  away. 'Call  her!' he said, and  he passed  silently  from the
chamber.
'Jowyn, Jowyn!' cried Jomer amid his tears. But she opened her eyes and
said: 'Jomer! What  joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but
that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long have I been dreaming?'
'Not long, my sister,' said Jomer. 'But think no more on it!'
' I am  strangely weary,' she said. 'I must rest a little. But tell me,
what of the Lord of the Mark? Alas! Do not tell me that that was a dream for
I know that it was not. He is dead as he foresaw.'
'He is dead,' said Jomer, 'but he bade me say farewell to  Jowyn dearer
than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.'
'That is grievous,' she said. 'And yet  it  is  good beyond all  that I
dared hope in the dark  days, when it seemed that the House of Eorl was sunk
in honour less than  any shepherd's cot. And what of the king's esquire, the
Halfling? Jomer, you shall make him a knight  of  the Riddermark, for he  is
valiant!'
'He lies nearby  in this  House,  and I will go  to him,' said Gandalf.
'Jomer  shall stay here for a while. But do  not  speak  yet of  war or woe,
until you are made whole  again. Great gladness  it is to see you wake again
to health and hope, so valiant a lady!'
'To health?' said  Jowyn. 'It  may  be so. At  least  while there is an
empty saddle of some  fallen Rider that I can  fill, and there  are deeds to
do. But to hope? I do not know.'
Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there  they found  Aragorn
standing by  the  bed.  'Poor  old Merry!' cried Pippin, and  he ran to  the
bedside, for it seemed to  him that  his friend looked worse, and a greyness
was in his face, as if a weight of years of sorrow  lay on him; and suddenly
