the sweet influence of the herb  stole about the chamber it seemed to  those
who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and it bore no scent,
but was an air wholly fresh  and  clean  and young, as if it had not  before
been  breathed  by any  living thing and came  new-made from snowy
mountains
high beneath a  dome of stars,  or from shores of silver far away  washed by
seas of foam.
'Awake, Jowyn, Lady of  Rohan!'  said  Aragorn again,  and he  took her
right hand in his and  felt it  warm with life returning. 'Awake! The shadow
is gone and all darkness is washed  clean!' Then he laid her hand in Jomer's
and  stepped  away. 'Call  her!' he said, and  he passed  silently  from the
chamber.
'Jowyn, Jowyn!' cried Jomer amid his tears. But she opened her eyes and
said: 'Jomer! What  joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but
that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long have I been dreaming?'
'Not long, my sister,' said Jomer. 'But think no more on it!'
' I am  strangely weary,' she said. 'I must rest a little. But tell me,
what of the Lord of the Mark? Alas! Do not tell me that that was a dream for
I know that it was not. He is dead as he foresaw.'
'He is dead,' said Jomer, 'but he bade me say farewell to  Jowyn dearer
than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.'
'That is grievous,' she said. 'And yet  it  is  good beyond all  that I
dared hope in the dark  days, when it seemed that the House of Eorl was sunk
in honour less than  any shepherd's cot. And what of the king's esquire, the
Halfling? Jomer, you shall make him a knight  of  the Riddermark, for he  is
valiant!'
'He lies nearby  in this  House,  and I will go  to him,' said Gandalf.
'Jomer  shall stay here for a while. But do  not  speak  yet of  war or woe,
until you are made whole  again. Great gladness  it is to see you wake again
to health and hope, so valiant a lady!'
'To health?' said  Jowyn. 'It  may  be so. At  least  while there is an
empty saddle of some  fallen Rider that I can  fill, and there  are deeds to
do. But to hope? I do not know.'
Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there  they found  Aragorn
standing by  the  bed.  'Poor  old Merry!' cried Pippin, and  he ran to  the
bedside, for it seemed to  him that  his friend looked worse, and a greyness
was in his face, as if a weight of years of sorrow  lay on him; and suddenly
a fear seized Pippin that Merry would die.
'Do not be afraid,'  said Aragorn. 'I came in  time, and  I have called
him back. He  is weary now, and grieved, and  he has taken a hurt  like  the
Lady Jowyn, daring  to  smite  that deadly  thing. But  these  evils can  be
amended, so strong and gay a spirit is in him. His grief he will not forget;
but it will not darken his heart, it will teach him wisdom.'
Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry's head, and passing his hand gently
through the brown curls, he touched the eyelids, and called him by name. And
when  the fragrance  of        athelas   stole through the room, like  the  scent  of
orchards, and of heather in the sunshine full of bees, suddenly Merry awoke,
and he said:
'I am hungry. What is the time?'
'Past supper-time  now,' said Pippin; 'though I daresay  I could  bring
you something, if they will let me.'
'They will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'And anything else that this Rider of
Rohan  may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where  his name is in
honour.'
'Good!' said Merry. 'Then I  would  like supper first, and after that a
pipe.' At that his face clouded. 'No, not a pipe.  I don't think I'll  smoke
again.'
'Why not?' said Pippin.
'Well,' answered Merry slowly. 'He is dead. It  has brought it all back
to me.  He said he was sorry he  had never had a chance of talking herb-lore
with me. Almost the last thing he ever said. I shan't ever be able to  smoke
again without  thinking of  him, and  that day, Pippin, when he  rode up  to
Isengard and was so polite.'
'Smoke then, and  think of  him!' said  Aragorn.  'For he  was a gentle
heart and a great king and kept his oaths; and he rose out of the shadows to
a last fair  morning.  Though your  service to him was brief, it should be a
memory glad and honourable to the end of your days.'
Merry  smiled. 'Well then,' he said, 'if  Strider will  provide what is
needed, I will smoke and think. I had some of Saruman's best in my pack, but
what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don't know.'
'Master  Meriadoc,' said  Aragorn,  'if  you  think that  I have passed
through the  mountains and the realm of Gondor with  fire and sword to bring
herbs to a  careless soldier who throws away his gear,  you are mistaken. If
your pack has not been found, then you must send for the herb-master of this
House. And he will tell you that he  did  not know that the herb  you desire
had  any  virtues, but  that it is  called       westmansweed        by  the vulgar,  and
galenas    by the  noble,  and  other names  in other tongues more learned, and
after adding  a few half-forgotten  rhymes that he  does not understand,  he
will regretfully inform  you  that there is none in the  House, and  he will
leave you  to reflect  on  the history of tongues.  And so now must I. For I
have not slept in such a bed as this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten
since the dark before dawn.'
Merry seized his hand and kissed it. 'I am frightfully sorry,' he said.
'Go at once!  Ever since that night at Bree we have been  a nuisance to you.
But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less
than they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the  right words when
a jest is out of place.'
'I  know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way ' said
Aragorn. 'May the Shire live for ever unwithered!' And kissing Merry he went
out, and Gandalf went with him.
Pippin  remained behind. 'Was  there  ever any one like him?'  he said.
'Except Gandalf, of course. I think they  must be related. My dear ass, your
pack is lying by your bed, and you  had  it on your back when I  met you. He
saw it all the time, of course. And anyway I have some stuff of my own. Come
on now! Longbottom Leaf it is.  Fill up while I run and see about some food.
And  then let's be  easy for  a bit. Dear me!  We Tooks  and Brandybucks, we
can't live long on the heights.'
'No,' said Merry. 'I can't. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin,
we can now see them, and honour them. It is best to  love first what you are
fitted to love, I suppose: you must start somewhere and have some roots, and
the soil of the Shire is deep. Still there are things deeper and higher; and
not a gaffer could tend his garden  in  what he calls  peace  but  for them,
whether  he knows about them or not.  I am  glad that  I know about them,  a
little. But I don't know why I am talking like this. Where is that leaf? And
get my pipe out of my pack, if it isn't broken.'
Aragorn and  Gandalf went now to the  Warden of the  Houses of Healing,
and they counselled him that Faramir and Jowyn should remain there and still
be tended with care for many days.
'The Lady Jowyn,' said Aragorn, 'will wish soon to rise and depart; but
she should not be  permitted to do so,  if you  can in any way restrain her,
until at least ten days be passed.'
