House. And he will tell you that he  did  not know that the herb  you desire
had  any  virtues, but  that it is  called       westmansweed        by  the vulgar,  and
galenas    by the  noble,  and  other names  in other tongues more learned, and
after adding  a few half-forgotten  rhymes that he  does not understand,  he
will regretfully inform  you  that there is none in the  House, and  he will
leave you  to reflect  on  the history of tongues.  And so now must I. For I
have not slept in such a bed as this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten
since the dark before dawn.'
Merry seized his hand and kissed it. 'I am frightfully sorry,' he said.
'Go at once!  Ever since that night at Bree we have been  a nuisance to you.
But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less
than they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the  right words when
a jest is out of place.'
'I  know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way ' said
Aragorn. 'May the Shire live for ever unwithered!' And kissing Merry he went
out, and Gandalf went with him.
Pippin  remained behind. 'Was  there  ever any one like him?'  he said.
'Except Gandalf, of course. I think they  must be related. My dear ass, your
pack is lying by your bed, and you  had  it on your back when I  met you. He
saw it all the time, of course. And anyway I have some stuff of my own. Come
on now! Longbottom Leaf it is.  Fill up while I run and see about some food.
And  then let's be  easy for  a bit. Dear me!  We Tooks  and Brandybucks, we
can't live long on the heights.'
'No,' said Merry. 'I can't. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin,
we can now see them, and honour them. It is best to  love first what you are
fitted to love, I suppose: you must start somewhere and have some roots, and
the soil of the Shire is deep. Still there are things deeper and higher; and
not a gaffer could tend his garden  in  what he calls  peace  but  for them,
whether  he knows about them or not.  I am  glad that  I know about them,  a
little. But I don't know why I am talking like this. Where is that leaf? And
get my pipe out of my pack, if it isn't broken.'
Aragorn and  Gandalf went now to the  Warden of the  Houses of Healing,
and they counselled him that Faramir and Jowyn should remain there and still
be tended with care for many days.
'The Lady Jowyn,' said Aragorn, 'will wish soon to rise and depart; but
she should not be  permitted to do so,  if you  can in any way restrain her,
until at least ten days be passed.'
'As for Faramir,' said Gandalf, 'he must soon  learn that his father is
dead. But the full  tale of the  madness  of Denethor should  not be told to
him, until  he is quite  healed and has duties to do. See  that Beregond and
the  perian   who were present do not speak to him of these things yet!'
And the other    perian    Meriadoc who is  under my care, what of him?' said
the Warden.
'It  is likely that  he will  be  fit  to arise tomorrow, for  a  short
while,' said Aragorn. 'Let him do so, if he  wishes. He may walk a little in
the care of his friends.'
'They are a remarkable race,' said the Warden, nodding his head.  'Very
tough in the fibre, I deem.'
At the  doors of the Houses many were already gathered to  see Aragorn,
and they  followed  after him; and when at last he  had supped, men came and
prayed that he would heal their kinsmen or their friends whose lives were in
peril through hurt or wound, or who lay under the Black  Shadow. And
Aragorn
arose and went out, and he sent for  the sons of  Elrond,  and together they
laboured  far into the  night. And word went through the City: 'The  King is
come again indeed.' And they named  him Elfstone, because of the green stone
that  he wore, and so  the name  which it was foretold at his  birth that he
should bear was chosen for him by his own people.
And when he  could labour no  more,  he cast his  cloak  about him, and
slipped out of the City, and went to his tent just ere dawn and  slept for a
little. And in the morning the banner of  Dol Amroth, a  white ship  like  a
swan upon blue water, floated from the Tower, and men looked up and
wondered
if the coming of the King had been but a dream.
Chapter 9. The Last Debate
The morning came after  the  day of battle, and it was fair with  light
clouds and the wind turning  westward. Legolas and  Gimli were early abroad,
and  they  begged leave to go up  into the City; for  they were eager to see
Merry and Pippin.
'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli;  'for they
cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains
all wasted.'
Together the  Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw
them  pass  marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was fair  of  face
beyond the measure of Men, and  he sang an elven-song in a clear voice as he
walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked  beside him, stroking his beard and
staring about him.
'There is  some  good  stone-work here,'  he said as he  looked  at the
walls;  'but also  some that is  less good, and  the streets could be better
contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the service of
stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.'
'They need more gardens,' said Legolas. 'The houses are dead, and there
is too little  here that grows and is glad.  If Aragorn comes into his  own,
the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not
die.'
At  length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and  Legolas  looked at him
and bowed  low; for he  saw that here  indeed was one who had elven-blood in
his veins. 'Hail, lord!' he said.  'It is long since the people  of Nimrodel
left the woodlands of Lurien, and yet still one may see that  not all sailed
from Amroth's haven west over water.'
'So it is said in the lore of my land,' said the Prince; 'yet never has
one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I marvel to
see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What do you seek?'
'I  am  one of the Nine  Companions  who  set  out with Mithrandir from
Imladris, said Legolas and with  this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord
Aragorn. But now we wish to see  our friends. Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are
in your keeping, we are told.'
'You  will  find them  in  the Houses of Healing, and  I will  lead you
