Chapter 9. The Last Debate
The morning came after  the  day of battle, and it was fair with  light
clouds and the wind turning  westward. Legolas and  Gimli were early abroad,
and  they  begged leave to go up  into the City; for  they were eager to see
Merry and Pippin.
'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli;  'for they
cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains
all wasted.'
Together the  Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw
them  pass  marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was fair  of  face
beyond the measure of Men, and  he sang an elven-song in a clear voice as he
walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked  beside him, stroking his beard and
staring about him.
'There is  some  good  stone-work here,'  he said as he  looked  at the
walls;  'but also  some that is  less good, and  the streets could be better
contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the service of
stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.'
'They need more gardens,' said Legolas. 'The houses are dead, and there
is too little  here that grows and is glad.  If Aragorn comes into his  own,
the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not
die.'
At  length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and  Legolas  looked at him
and bowed  low; for he  saw that here  indeed was one who had elven-blood in
his veins. 'Hail, lord!' he said.  'It is long since the people  of Nimrodel
left the woodlands of Lurien, and yet still one may see that  not all sailed
from Amroth's haven west over water.'
'So it is said in the lore of my land,' said the Prince; 'yet never has
one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I marvel to
see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What do you seek?'
'I  am  one of the Nine  Companions  who  set  out with Mithrandir from
Imladris, said Legolas and with  this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord
Aragorn. But now we wish to see  our friends. Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are
in your keeping, we are told.'
'You  will  find them  in  the Houses of Healing, and  I will  lead you
thither,' said Imrahil.
'It will be  enough if you send one to guide  us,  lord,' said Legolas.
'For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish  to  enter the City
again at this  time. Yet there is need  for the captains to hold  council at
once, and he prays that you and Jomer of  Rohan will come down to his tents,
as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already there.'
'We will come,' said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous words.
'That  is  a  fair lord and a great captain of men,'  said Legolas. 'If
Gondor has such men still in these  days of fading, great must have been its
glory in the days of its rising.'
'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and  was wrought in the
first building,' said  Gimli. 'It is ever so with the things that Men begin:
there  is a frost  in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and they  fail of their
promise.'
'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,' said  Legolas. 'And that  will
lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked-for.
The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.'
'And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,' said
the Dwarf.
'To that the Elves know not the answer,' said Legolas.
With that the servant of the  Prince came and led them to the Houses of
Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden, and their meeting
was a merry one.  For a while  they walked and talked, rejoicing for a brief
space in peace  and rest under  the morning high up in the windy  circles of
the City. Then when Merry became weary, they went and sat upon the wall
with
the  greensward of  the  Houses of Healing behind them; and  away  southward
before  them was the Anduin glittering in the sun, as it flowed away, out of
the  sight even  of Legolas, into the wide  flats and green haze of Lebennin
and South Ithilien.
And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out
against the sun,  and as  he  gazed he  saw white sea-birds  beating  up the
River.
'Look!' he cried. 'Gulls! They are flying far inland. A wonder they are
to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in  all my life had I met them, until
we came to  Pelargir, and there I heard them crying in the air as we rode to
the battle of the ships. Then I stood still, forgetting war in Middle-earth;
for their wailing  voices spoke to me of the Sea. The Sea!  Alas! I have not
yet  beheld  it.  But  deep  in  the  hearts  of  all  my  kindred lies  the
sea-longing,  which it is perilous  to stir. Alas! for the  gulls. No  peace
shall I have again under beech or under elm.'
'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are  countless things still to see  in
Middle-earth, and great works to  do. But if  all  the fair folk take to the
Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.'
'Dull and dreary indeed!' said Merry: 'You must  not go to the  Havens,
Legolas. There will always  be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise
dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I  hope so. Though I feel somehow
that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all over, and
well over!'
'Don't  be  so gloomy!' cried Pippin.  'The Sun is shining, and here we
are  together  for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about you all.
Come, Gimli!  You  and  Legolas have mentioned  your  strange  journey  with
Strider about a dozen times  already  this  morning. But you haven't told me
anything about it.'
'The Sun may  shine here,' said Gimli, 'but  there are memories of that
road  that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was
before me, I think  that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths
of the Dead.'
'The Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin.  'I heard Aragorn say  that and I
wondered what he could mean. Won't you tell us some more?'
'Not willingly,' said Gimli.  'For upon that road  I  was put to shame:
Gimli Gluin's son, who had deemed  himself  more tough than Men, and
hardier
under  earth than  any Elf. But neither did  I prove;  and I was held to the
road only by the will of Aragorn.'
'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas. 'For all those who come to
know him come to love him after his own fashion, even the cold maiden of the
Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we
left Dunharrow, and such a fear was  on all the folk that none would look on
our going,  save the Lady Jowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There
was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.'
'Alas! I had heart only for myself,' said Gimli. 'Nay! I will not speak
of that journey.'
He fell silent;  but Pippin and  Merry were  so eager for news that  at
