for their wailing  voices spoke to me of the Sea. The Sea!  Alas! I have not
yet  beheld  it.  But  deep  in  the  hearts  of  all  my  kindred lies  the
sea-longing,  which it is perilous  to stir. Alas! for the  gulls. No  peace
shall I have again under beech or under elm.'
'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are  countless things still to see  in
Middle-earth, and great works to  do. But if  all  the fair folk take to the
Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.'
'Dull and dreary indeed!' said Merry: 'You must  not go to the  Havens,
Legolas. There will always  be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise
dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I  hope so. Though I feel somehow
that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all over, and
well over!'
'Don't  be  so gloomy!' cried Pippin.  'The Sun is shining, and here we
are  together  for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about you all.
Come, Gimli!  You  and  Legolas have mentioned  your  strange  journey  with
Strider about a dozen times  already  this  morning. But you haven't told me
anything about it.'
'The Sun may  shine here,' said Gimli, 'but  there are memories of that
road  that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was
before me, I think  that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths
of the Dead.'
'The Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin.  'I heard Aragorn say  that and I
wondered what he could mean. Won't you tell us some more?'
'Not willingly,' said Gimli.  'For upon that road  I  was put to shame:
Gimli Gluin's son, who had deemed  himself  more tough than Men, and
hardier
under  earth than  any Elf. But neither did  I prove;  and I was held to the
road only by the will of Aragorn.'
'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas. 'For all those who come to
know him come to love him after his own fashion, even the cold maiden of the
Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we
left Dunharrow, and such a fear was  on all the folk that none would look on
our going,  save the Lady Jowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There
was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.'
'Alas! I had heart only for myself,' said Gimli. 'Nay! I will not speak
of that journey.'
He fell silent;  but Pippin and  Merry were  so eager for news that  at
last  Legolas  said: 'I will tell you enough for your peace;  for I felt not
the  horror, and I feared not the shadows of  Men, powerless and frail  as I
deemed them.'
Swiftly then he told of  the haunted  road under the mountains, and the
dark tryst at Erech, and the great ride thence, ninety leagues and three, to
Pelargir on Anduin. 'Four days and nights, and on into a fifth, we rode from
the Black Stone,' he said.  'And lo! in the darkness of Mordor my hope rose;
for in that  gloom the Shadow Host seemed to grow stronger and more terrible
to look upon. Some I saw riding, some striding, yet all moving with the same
great speed. Silent they were, but there was a gleam in  their eyes. In  the
uplands of Lamedon they overtook our horses, and  swept round us, and  would
have passed us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them.
'At his command they fell back. "Even the shades of Men are obedient to
his will," I thought. "They may serve his needs yet! "
'One day of light  we  rode, and then  came the  day  without dawn, and
still we rode on, and  Ciril and Ringlu we crossed; and on  the third day we
came to  Linhir above  the mouth  of  Gilrain.  And  there  men  of  Lamedon
contested the fords with fell folk  of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the
river. But  defenders  and  foes alike gave up  the battle and fled  when we
came,  crying out that the King of the Dead was upon them. Only Angbor, Lord
of Lamedon, had the heart to abide us; and Aragorn bade  him gather his folk
and come behind, if they dared, when the Grey Host had passed.
' "At Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you," he said.
'Thus we crossed  over Gilrain,  driving the allies  of  Mordor in rout
before us; and then we rested a while. But soon Aragorn  arose, saying: "Lo!
already  Minas Tirith is assailed. I  fear that it  will fall ere we come to
its aid." So  we mounted again before  night had passed and went on with all
the speed that our horses could endure over the plains of Lebennin.'
Legolas paused  and  sighed,  and turning his eyes southward softly  he
sang:
Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui
In the green fields of Lebennin!
Tall grows the grass there. In the wind from the Sea
The white lilies sway,
And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin
In the green fields of Lebennin,
In the wind from the Sea!
'Green are those  fields in the songs of my people; but  they were dark
then,  grey  wastes  in  the blackness  before  us. And over  the wide land,
trampling unheeded the grass and  the flowers, we hunted our foes through  a
day and a night, until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last.
'Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the  Sea; for wide was
the  water in the darkness, and sea-birds innumerable cried on its,  shores.
Alas  for  the wailing of the  gulls! Did  not the Lady tell me to beware of
them? And now I cannot forget them.'
'For my part  I heeded them not,' said Gimli; 'for we came then at last
upon battle in earnest. There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umbar, fifty
great ships and smaller  vessels beyond count. Many of those that we pursued
had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them; and some
of  the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River or to reach  the
far shore; and many of  the  smaller  craft were  ablaze.  But the Haradrim,
being  now  driven  to the brink, turned at  bay,  and they were  fierce  in
despair; and they laughed when they looked on us, for they were a great army
still.
'But Aragorn  halted and cried with a great voice:  "Now  come!  By the
Black Stone I call you! " And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at
the last  came up like a grey tide, sweeping all away before it. Faint cries
I heard, and  dim horns blowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices: it
was like the echo of  some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago. Pale
swords were drawn; but I know not whether their blades would still bite, for
the Dead needed no longer any weapon but fear. None would withstand them.
'To every  ship they came that was drawn up, and then  they passed over
the water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with
a madness  of  terror and leaped  overboard, save the  slaves chained to the
oars. Reckless  we rode among  our fleeing foes,  driving them  like leaves,
until  we  came to  the  shore. And then to each  of  the  great  ships that
remained Aragorn sent one of the D®nedain,  and  they comforted the captives
that were aboard, and bade them put aside fear and be free.
'Ere  that dark day ended none of the  enemy were left to resist us all
were drowned, or were flying  south in the hope to find their own lands upon
foot.  Strange and wonderful I thought it that  the designs of Mordor should
be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness. With its own weapons was
it worsted!'
'Strange indeed,' said Legolas. 'In that  hour I  looked on Aragorn and
