'Black figures  riding  on black horses,'  answered Pippin.  'If  Frodo
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave
a  full account of their journey from the time  when they left Hobbiton. Sam
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.
'I should  think you were making it all up,'  said Merry, 'if I had not
seen  that black shape on  the landing-stage - and heard the queer  sound in
Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?'
'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come
for  him to open  out. So far we have been given nothing  more to go on than
Farmer  Maggot's  guess  that  it  has  something  to  do  with  old Bilbo's
treasure.'
'That  was  only  a  guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does  not               know
anything.'
'Old Maggot is  a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind his
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go
into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good
many  strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think
his guess good or bad.'
'I  think,'  answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as  far as
it  goes. There    is a  connexion with Bilbo's  old adventures,  and the Riders
are looking,  or perhaps one  ought to say             searching,     for him or for me. I
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not
safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if
he was afraid  they would  suddenly give  way.  The others looked at him  in
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves.
'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded.
'Well!' said Frodo at  last, sitting  up and straightening his back, as
if he had made  a  decision.  'I can't keep it dark any  longer.  I have got
something to tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin.'
'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of
it myself.'
'What do you mean?' said  Frodo, looking  at him anxiously. 'Just this,
my  dear old  Frodo: you  are miserable, because you don't know how  to  say
good-bye.  You  meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come  on
you sooner  than you expected, and now you are  making up your mind to go at
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you.'
Frodo opened his mouth  and shut it again. His  look of surprise was so
comical that they laughed. 'Dear  old  Frodo!' said Pippin.  'Did you really
think you had thrown dust in  all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying
farewell  to  all your haunts all this  year since April. We have constantly
heard you  muttering:  "Shall  I  ever  look  down into that valley again, I
wonder",  and things like that.  And pretending that you had come to the end
of  your  money,  and  actually  selling  your  beloved  Bag  End  to  those
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.'
'Good  heavens!'  said Frodo. 'I thought  I had been  both  careful and
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all  the Shire discussing my
departure then?'
'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for
long,  of  course;  but  at  present it  is,  I  think,  only  known  to  us
conspirators. After  all, you must remember  that we know you  well, and are
often with  you.  We can usually guess what you are thinking. I  knew Bilbo,
too. To  tell you the truth,  I had been watching you  rather  closely  ever
since he  left. I thought you would go  after him sooner or  later; indeed I
expected you  to go sooner, and lately we have  been very  anxious.  We have
been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly,  all on
your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and
done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape
so easily!'
'But I must go,' said Frodo. 'It cannot be helped, dear friends. It  is
wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have
guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!'
'You  do not understand!' said Pippin. 'You  must go - and therefore we
must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow,  and
would jump down a dragon's throat to  save you, if he did not trip over  his
own feet; but  you  will  need  more than one  companion in  your  dangerous
adventure.'
'My dear  and  most beloved hobbits!'  said Frodo deeply  moved. 'But I
could not  allow it. I decided that  long ago, too. You speak of danger, but
you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt,  no there-and-back journey.
I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril.'
'Of course  we understand,'  said Merry  firmly.  'That is why we  have
decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but we are going to
do our best to help you against the Enemy.'
'The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed.
'Yes, the Ring,' said  Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't  allow for
the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring
for years - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded
it  as  secret,  I  kept  the  knowledge  in  my  head, until we formed  our
conspiracy. I  did not know Bilbo, of course, as  well as I know you; I  was
too young, and he was also more careful - but  he was not careful enough. If
you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.'
'Go on!' said Frodo faintly.
'It was  the  Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall,  as you might
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the
road, when I  saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared,
coming towards us.  Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he  vanished.  I
was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary
fashion; but  I got through the hedge and walked along the  field inside.  I
was  peeping  through into the road,  after the S.-B.s  had  passed, and was
looking  straight at Bilbo  when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of
gold as he put something back in his trouser-pocket.
'After that I kept my  eyes open.  In fact, I confess that I spied. But
you must  admit that it was very  intriguing, and I was only in my teens.  I
must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the
old fellow's secret book.'
'You have read his book!' cried Frodo.  'Good heavens above! Is nothing
safe?'
'Not  too safe, I should say,' said  Merry.  'But  I have  only had one
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I
wonder what became  of it. I should  like  another look.  Have you  got  it,
Frodo?'
'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.'
'Well, as  I  was saying,' Merry  proceeded, 'I  kept my  knowledge  to
myself,  till  this Spring  when  things got  serious. Then  we  formed  our
conspiracy;  and  as we were serious, too,  and meant business,  we have not
been too scrupulous. You are  not a very easy  nut to crack,  and Gandalf is
worse. But if  you want to be  introduced  to our chief investigator, I  can
produce him.'
'Where is  he?' said  Frodo, looking round, as if he  expected a masked
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard.
