'Green are those  fields in the songs of my people; but  they were dark
then,  grey  wastes  in  the blackness  before  us. And over  the wide land,
trampling unheeded the grass and  the flowers, we hunted our foes through  a
day and a night, until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last.
'Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the  Sea; for wide was
the  water in the darkness, and sea-birds innumerable cried on its,  shores.
Alas  for  the wailing of the  gulls! Did  not the Lady tell me to beware of
them? And now I cannot forget them.'
'For my part  I heeded them not,' said Gimli; 'for we came then at last
upon battle in earnest. There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umbar, fifty
great ships and smaller  vessels beyond count. Many of those that we pursued
had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them; and some
of  the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River or to reach  the
far shore; and many of  the  smaller  craft were  ablaze.  But the Haradrim,
being  now  driven  to the brink, turned at  bay,  and they were  fierce  in
despair; and they laughed when they looked on us, for they were a great army
still.
'But Aragorn  halted and cried with a great voice:  "Now  come!  By the
Black Stone I call you! " And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at
the last  came up like a grey tide, sweeping all away before it. Faint cries
I heard, and  dim horns blowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices: it
was like the echo of  some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago. Pale
swords were drawn; but I know not whether their blades would still bite, for
the Dead needed no longer any weapon but fear. None would withstand them.
'To every  ship they came that was drawn up, and then  they passed over
the water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with
a madness  of  terror and leaped  overboard, save the  slaves chained to the
oars. Reckless  we rode among  our fleeing foes,  driving them  like leaves,
until  we  came to  the  shore. And then to each  of  the  great  ships that
remained Aragorn sent one of the D®nedain,  and  they comforted the captives
that were aboard, and bade them put aside fear and be free.
'Ere  that dark day ended none of the  enemy were left to resist us all
were drowned, or were flying  south in the hope to find their own lands upon
foot.  Strange and wonderful I thought it that  the designs of Mordor should
be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness. With its own weapons was
it worsted!'
'Strange indeed,' said Legolas. 'In that  hour I  looked on Aragorn and
thought how  great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the  strength
of his  will, had he taken the Ring to  himself.  Not for naught does Mordor
fear him. But nobler is his spirit than  the understanding of Sauron; for is
he not of  the children of  L®thien? Never shall that  line fail, though the
years may lengthen beyond count.'
'Beyond  the eyes of the Dwarves are  such  foretellings,'  said Gimli.
'But mighty indeed was  Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black fleet was in his
hands; and he chose the greatest ship to be his own, and he went up into it.
Then he  let sound a great concourse  of trumpets taken  from the enemy; and
the Shadow Host withdrew to the shore. There they stood silent, hardly to be
seen, save for a red gleam in their eyes that caught the glare of the  ships
that were  burning.  And Aragorn  spoke  in a  loud voice  to  the Dead Men,
crying:
' "Hear  now the words of the Heir of Isildur!  Your oath is fulfilled.
Go back and trouble not the valleys ever again! Depart and be at rest! "
'And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke
his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and  turned away; and  swiftly
the whole grey host drew off and vanished like a mist that is driven back by
a sudden wind; and it seemed to me that I awoke from a dream.
'That  night  we  rested  while  others  laboured.  For there were many
captives set  free,  and many slaves released who  had  been folk  of Gondor
taken in raids; and  soon also  there  was  a great gathering  of men out of
Lebennin and the  Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came up with all the
horsemen
that he could muster. Now that the fear of the Dead was removed they came to
aid us and to look on  the Heir of Isildur; for the  rumour of that name had
run like fire in the dark.
'And  that  is near the end  of our tale.  For during  that evening and
night many ships were  made ready and  manned; and in the morning the  fleet
set forth. Long  past it now seems,  yet it was but the morn of  the day ere
yesterday, the  sixth  since  we rode  from Dunharrow. But still Aragorn was
driven by fear that time was too short.
'  "It is forty leagues and  two from Pelargir to  the  landings at the
Harlond,"  he  said.  "Yet to  the  Harlond we must  come tomorrow  or  fail
utterly."
'The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they laboured; yet
slowly we passed up  the Great River, for  we strove against its stream, and
though that is not swift down in  the South,  we had no help  of wind. Heavy
would my heart have been, for all our victory at the  havens, if Legolas had
not laughed suddenly.
' "Up  with your beard, Durin's son! " he said. "For thus is it spoken:
Oft hope is  born, when  all is forlorn         ." But what hope  he saw from afar he
would  not tell. When  night came it  did  but deepen  the darkness, and our
hearts were  hot, for away in  the North we saw a red glow under the  cloud,
and Aragorn said: "Minas Tirith is burning."
'But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea-crafty men of the Ethir
gazing southward spoke  of a change coming  with a fresh  wind from the Sea.
Long  ere day the masted ships  hoisted sail; and our speed grew, until dawn
whitened the foam at our prows. And so it was, as  you know, that we came in
the third  hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we
unfurled the great standard in battle. It was a great  day and a great hour,
whatever may come after.'
'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas.
'Great  deed was the riding of  the Paths  of the Dead, and great  it  shall
remain, though none be left  in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to
come.'
'And  that may well befall,' said Gimli.  'For the faces of Aragorn and
Gandalf are grave. Much I  wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents
there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory  the  war
was now over.  Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for
the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'
'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love
of the Lord of the White Tree.'
Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high
place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains debated.
When the Prince Imrahil had parted  from Legolas and Gimli, at once  he
sent  for Jomer; and he went down with him  from the  City, and they came to
the tents  of Aragorn that were set up on the field not  far  from the place
where King Thjoden had  fallen.  And there they took  counsel together  with
Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons of Elrond.
'My lords,' said Gandalf, 'listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor
before he died:     You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but
against the Power that has  now arisen there is no victory                . I do not bid you
despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these words.
