though that is not swift down in  the South,  we had no help  of wind. Heavy
would my heart have been, for all our victory at the  havens, if Legolas had
not laughed suddenly.
' "Up  with your beard, Durin's son! " he said. "For thus is it spoken:
Oft hope is  born, when  all is forlorn         ." But what hope  he saw from afar he
would  not tell. When  night came it  did  but deepen  the darkness, and our
hearts were  hot, for away in  the North we saw a red glow under the  cloud,
and Aragorn said: "Minas Tirith is burning."
'But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea-crafty men of the Ethir
gazing southward spoke  of a change coming  with a fresh  wind from the Sea.
Long  ere day the masted ships  hoisted sail; and our speed grew, until dawn
whitened the foam at our prows. And so it was, as  you know, that we came in
the third  hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we
unfurled the great standard in battle. It was a great  day and a great hour,
whatever may come after.'
'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas.
'Great  deed was the riding of  the Paths  of the Dead, and great  it  shall
remain, though none be left  in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to
come.'
'And  that may well befall,' said Gimli.  'For the faces of Aragorn and
Gandalf are grave. Much I  wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents
there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory  the  war
was now over.  Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for
the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'
'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love
of the Lord of the White Tree.'
Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high
place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains debated.
When the Prince Imrahil had parted  from Legolas and Gimli, at once  he
sent  for Jomer; and he went down with him  from the  City, and they came to
the tents  of Aragorn that were set up on the field not  far  from the place
where King Thjoden had  fallen.  And there they took  counsel together  with
Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons of Elrond.
'My lords,' said Gandalf, 'listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor
before he died:     You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but
against the Power that has  now arisen there is no victory                . I do not bid you
despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these words.
'The  Stones of Seeing do  not lie, and not even  the Lord of Barad-dyr
can make  them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what things shall be
seen by weaker minds, or cause them to mistake the meaning of what they see.
Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that when Denethor saw great forces arrayed
against him  in Mordor,  and more  still being gathered, he  saw  that which
truly is.
'Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first  great assault.
The next will be greater.  This war  then is without final hope, as Denethor
perceived. Victory  cannot be  achieved by  arms, whether  you sit  here  to
endure siege after siege, or  march  out to be overwhelmed beyond the River.
You  have  only a  choice  of  evils;  and prudence  would  counsel  you  to
strengthen such strong places as you have, and there await the onset; for so
shall the time before your end be made a little longer.'
'Then you would have  us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol  Amroth, or to
Dunharrow, and  there sit  like children on  sand-castles when  the tide  is
flowing?' said Imrahil.
'That would  be no new  counsel,' said Gandalf. 'Have you not done this
and  little more in all the  days of Denethor?  But no! I said this would be
prudent. I do not counsel prudence. I said  victory could not be achieved by
arms. I still hope for victory, but not by arms.  For into the midst  of all
these policies comes the Ring of Power, the foundation of Barad-dyr, and the
hope of Sauron.
'Concerning  this  thing,  my  lords, you now  all know enough for  the
understanding of our plight, and of  Sauron's. If he regains it, your valour
is  vain, and his victory will be swift and complete: so  complete that none
can foresee the  end of it while this world lasts. If it is destroyed,  then
he will fall; and his  fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising
ever again. For he will lose the best part of the  strength  that was native
to him in his beginning, and all that was made or begun with that power will
crumble, and he will  be maimed  for ever, becoming a mere  spirit of malice
that  gnaws itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow  or take shape. And
so a great evil of this world will be removed.
'Other evils there are  that may come;  for  Sauron  is  himself  but a
servant or emissary.  Yet it is  not our part to master all the tides of the
world, but to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are
set, uprooting the  evil in the fields that we know, so  that those who live
after may have clean earth to till. What weather they shall have is not ours
to rule.
'Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which
he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where it is, or so we
hope. And therefore he is now  in great doubt. For  if we  have  found  this
thing, there are some among us with strength enough to wield it. That too he
knows. For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown  yourself to
him in the Stone of Orthanc?'
'I did so  ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I  deemed
that the time was ripe, and that the  Stone had  come to me  for just such a
purpose. It was  then ten  days since the Ring-bearer went east from Rauros,
and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land. Too
seldom has he been challenged since he  returned to his  Tower. Though if  I
had foreseen how swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have
dared to show myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.'
'But how is  this?' asked Jomer. 'All is  vain, you say,  if he has the
Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?'
'He is not yet sure,' said Gandalf, 'and  he has not built up his power
by waiting until his enemies are secure,  as we have done. Also we could not
learn how to wield the  full  power all in a day. Indeed it can be used only
by one master alone, not by many; and he will look for a time of strife, ere
one  of the great among us makes himself master and puts down the others. In
that time the Ring might aid him, if he were sudden.
'He  is  watching. He sees  much and hears much.  His Nazgyl  are still
abroad. They passed over this field ere the sunrise, though few of the weary
and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the signs: the Sword that robbed
him of his treasure re-made; the winds of fortune turning in our favour, and
the defeat unlooked-for of his first assault the fall of his great Captain.
'His doubt will  be  growing, even  as we  speak here. His  Eye is  now
straining towards us,  blind  almost to all  else that is moving. So we must
keep it. Therein  lies all our hope. This, then, is my  counsel. We have not
the Ring. In wisdom or  great folly it has been sent away  to be  destroyed,
lest it destroy  us. Without it we  cannot by force defeat his force. But we
must  at all  costs  keep his Eye  from his true  peril. We  cannot  achieve
victory  by  arms, but by arms we can give the Ring-bearer his  only chance,
frail though it be.
'As Aragorn has begun, so  we must go  on. We must push  Sauron  to his
last throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he shall empty his
