to rule.
'Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which
he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where it is, or so we
hope. And therefore he is now  in great doubt. For  if we  have  found  this
thing, there are some among us with strength enough to wield it. That too he
knows. For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown  yourself to
him in the Stone of Orthanc?'
'I did so  ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I  deemed
that the time was ripe, and that the  Stone had  come to me  for just such a
purpose. It was  then ten  days since the Ring-bearer went east from Rauros,
and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land. Too
seldom has he been challenged since he  returned to his  Tower. Though if  I
had foreseen how swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have
dared to show myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.'
'But how is  this?' asked Jomer. 'All is  vain, you say,  if he has the
Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?'
'He is not yet sure,' said Gandalf, 'and  he has not built up his power
by waiting until his enemies are secure,  as we have done. Also we could not
learn how to wield the  full  power all in a day. Indeed it can be used only
by one master alone, not by many; and he will look for a time of strife, ere
one  of the great among us makes himself master and puts down the others. In
that time the Ring might aid him, if he were sudden.
'He  is  watching. He sees  much and hears much.  His Nazgyl  are still
abroad. They passed over this field ere the sunrise, though few of the weary
and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the signs: the Sword that robbed
him of his treasure re-made; the winds of fortune turning in our favour, and
the defeat unlooked-for of his first assault the fall of his great Captain.
'His doubt will  be  growing, even  as we  speak here. His  Eye is  now
straining towards us,  blind  almost to all  else that is moving. So we must
keep it. Therein  lies all our hope. This, then, is my  counsel. We have not
the Ring. In wisdom or  great folly it has been sent away  to be  destroyed,
lest it destroy  us. Without it we  cannot by force defeat his force. But we
must  at all  costs  keep his Eye  from his true  peril. We  cannot  achieve
victory  by  arms, but by arms we can give the Ring-bearer his  only chance,
frail though it be.
'As Aragorn has begun, so  we must go  on. We must push  Sauron  to his
last throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he shall empty his
land. We must march out to meet him at  once.  We  must  make ourselves  the
bait, though his jaws  should close  on us. He will take that bait,  in hope
and in  greed, for he will think that in  such rashness he sees the pride of
the new Ringlord: and he will say: "So!  he pushes out his neck too soon and
too far. Let him come on, and behold I will have him in a trap from which he
cannot escape.  There  I  will  crush  him, and  what he  has taken  in  his
insolence shall be mine again for ever."
'We must walk open-eyed into that  trap, with courage,  but small  hope
for ourselves.  For, my  lords,  it may  well prove  that we ourselves shall
perish utterly in  a black battle far from the living lands; so that even if
Barad-dyr  be thrown down, we shall not live to  see a new age.  But this, I
deem, is our  duty. And better so than  to perish nonetheless - as we surely
shall, if we sit here - and know as we die that no new age shall be.'
They were  silent for a while.  At  length Aragorn  spoke.  'As  I have
begun, so I  will go on.  We  come  now  to the  very brink, where hope  and
despair are akin. To waver is to fall.  Let none  now reject the counsels of
Gandalf,  whose long labours against  Sauron come at last to their test. But
for him all would long ago have been lost. Nonetheless I do not yet claim to
command any man. Let others choose as they will.'
Then said Elrohir: 'From the North we came with this purpose,  and from
Elrond our father we brought this very counsel. We will not turn back.'
'As for  myself,'  said Jomer, 'I have little knowledge of  these  deep
matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend
Aragorn succoured  me and my people, so I will aid him when he calls. I will
go.'
'As  for  me,'  said  Imrahil,  'the  Lord  Aragorn  I  hold to  be  my
liege-lord, whether he  claim it or no. His wish  is to me a command. I will
go also. Yet for a  while I stand in the place of the Steward of Gondor, and
it is mine to think first of its people. To prudence some heed must still be
given. For we must prepare against  all chances, good as well as  evil. Now,
it may be that we shall triumph, and while there is any hope of this, Gondor
must be protected.  I  would not have us return  with victory  to a City  in
ruins and a land ravaged behind us. And yet we learn from the  Rohirrim that
there is an army still unfought upon our northern flank.'
'That is true,' said Gandalf. 'I  do not  counsel you to leave the City
all unmanned.  Indeed  the force that  we lead east need not be great enough
for any  assault in earnest  upon Mordor, so  long as it be great enough  to
challenge battle. And it must move soon.  Therefore I ask the Captains: what
force could we muster and lead out in two days' time at the latest? And they
must be hardy men that go willingly, knowing their peril.'
'All are weary,  and very  many have  wounds  light  or grievous,' said
Jomer,  'and  we have suffered  much loss of our horses, and that  is ill to
bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot  hope to  lead even two thousands,
and yet leave as many for the defence of the City.'
'We have not only to reckon with those who fought  on this field ' said
Aragorn.  'New strength is on the way from the southern fiefs, now  that the
coasts have been  rid. Four thousands I sent marching from Pelargir  through
Lossarnach two days  ago; and  Angbor the fearless rides  before them. If we
set out in two days  more,  they will draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many
were bidden to  follow me up the River  in  any craft they could gather; and
with this wind they  will soon be at hand, indeed several ships have already
come to the Harlond. I judge that we could lead out seven thousands of horse
and foot, and yet  leave the City  in better defence  than it  was  when the
assault began.'
'The Gate  is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill  to
rebuild it and set it up anew?'
'In Erebor  in  the Kingdom of Dbin there is such skill,' said Aragorn;
'and  if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Gluin's
son to ask for wrights of  the Mountain. But  men are better than gates, and
no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.'
This then was the end of the debate  of the lords: that they should set
forth on the  second  morning from that day with  seven thousands, if  these
might  be found; and the great part of this force should be on foot, because
of the  evil lands  into which they would go. Aragorn  should  find some two
thousands  of those that he  had  gathered to him  in the South; but Imrahil
should find three  and  a half thousands;  and Jomer  five  hundreds  of the
Rohirrim who  were unhorsed but themselves warworthy, and he himself
should
lead five hundreds of his  best Riders on horse; and another company of five
hundred horse there  should be,  among which should ride the sons  of Elrond
with  the D®nedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot
and a thousand horse. But the main strength  of the  Rohirrim  that remained
horsed and able to  fight, some three thousand under the command of Elfhelm,
should waylay the West Road against  the enemy that was in  Anurien. And  at
