challenge battle. And it must move soon.  Therefore I ask the Captains: what
force could we muster and lead out in two days' time at the latest? And they
must be hardy men that go willingly, knowing their peril.'
'All are weary,  and very  many have  wounds  light  or grievous,' said
Jomer,  'and  we have suffered  much loss of our horses, and that  is ill to
bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot  hope to  lead even two thousands,
and yet leave as many for the defence of the City.'
'We have not only to reckon with those who fought  on this field ' said
Aragorn.  'New strength is on the way from the southern fiefs, now  that the
coasts have been  rid. Four thousands I sent marching from Pelargir  through
Lossarnach two days  ago; and  Angbor the fearless rides  before them. If we
set out in two days  more,  they will draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many
were bidden to  follow me up the River  in  any craft they could gather; and
with this wind they  will soon be at hand, indeed several ships have already
come to the Harlond. I judge that we could lead out seven thousands of horse
and foot, and yet  leave the City  in better defence  than it  was  when the
assault began.'
'The Gate  is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill  to
rebuild it and set it up anew?'
'In Erebor  in  the Kingdom of Dbin there is such skill,' said Aragorn;
'and  if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Gluin's
son to ask for wrights of  the Mountain. But  men are better than gates, and
no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.'
This then was the end of the debate  of the lords: that they should set
forth on the  second  morning from that day with  seven thousands, if  these
might  be found; and the great part of this force should be on foot, because
of the  evil lands  into which they would go. Aragorn  should  find some two
thousands  of those that he  had  gathered to him  in the South; but Imrahil
should find three  and  a half thousands;  and Jomer  five  hundreds  of the
Rohirrim who  were unhorsed but themselves warworthy, and he himself
should
lead five hundreds of his  best Riders on horse; and another company of five
hundred horse there  should be,  among which should ride the sons  of Elrond
with  the D®nedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot
and a thousand horse. But the main strength  of the  Rohirrim  that remained
horsed and able to  fight, some three thousand under the command of Elfhelm,
should waylay the West Road against  the enemy that was in  Anurien. And  at
once swift riders were sent out to gather  what news they could  northwards;
and eastwards from Osgiliath and the road to Minas Morgul.
And when they  had reckoned up all their strength and taken thought for
the  journeys  they should  make  and the  roads they should choose, Imrahil
suddenly laughed aloud.
'Surely,' he cried, 'this is  the greatest jest  in  all the history of
Gondor:  that  we should  ride with seven thousands,  scarce  as many as the
vanguard of its army in  the days of its power, to assail the mountains  and
the impenetrable  gate  of the  Black Land!  So  might  a  child  threaten a
mail-clad knight with a bow of string and green  willow! If  the  Dark  Lord
knows so  much as you say, Mithrandir,  will  he not rather smile than fear,
and with his little finger crush us like a fly that tries to sting him?'
'No, he  will try to  trap  the fly  and take the sting,' said Gandalf.
'And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand  mail-clad
knights apiece. No, he will not smile.'
'Neither  shall  we,'  said Aragorn. 'If this be  jest, then it is  too
bitter for laughter.  Nay, it is the last  move in a great jeopardy, and for
one  side or  the other  it  will bring the end of the game.' Then  he  drew
And®ril and  held it up glittering  in the sun. 'You shall  not  be sheathed
again until the last battle is fought;' he said.
Chapter 10. The Black Gate Opens
Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the  Pelennor.
The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anurien, but harried
and scattered by the Rohirrim they had  broken and fled with little fighting
towards Cair  Andros;  and with  that  threat  destroyed  and  new  strength
arriving out of the South the City  was as well  manned  as might be. Scouts
reported  that  no  enemies remained  upon the  roads  east  as  far  as the
Cross-roads of the Fallen King. All now was ready for the last throw.
Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn
and Gandalf, who went in the  van with the D®nedain  and the sons of Elrond.
But Merry to his shame was not to go with them.
'You are  not fit for  such a  journey,' said  Aragorn. 'But  do not be
ashamed.  If  you do no  more  in  this  war, you have already earned  great
honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and do not grudge him
his chance of peril, for  though  he has done as well as his fortune allowed
him, he has yet to match your deed. But in truth all now are in like danger.
Though it may be our part to  find bitter end before the  Gate of Mordor, if
we do so,  then you will come also to a last  stand, either here or wherever
the black tide overtakes you. Farewell!'
And  so  despondently Merry now  stood and watched the mustering of the
army. Bergil was with him, and  he  also was downcast; for his father was to
march leading a company of the  Men  of the City:  he could not  rejoin  the
Guard until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was also to go,
as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright
figure among the tall men of Minas Tirith.
At last the  trumpets  rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop,
and company by company,  they wheeled and went off  eastward. And long
after
they had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway, Merry
stood there. The  last glint of the morning sun  on  spear and helm twinkled
and was lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling
friendless  and  alone. Everyone  that  he cared for had  gone away into the
gloom  that  hung over the distant eastern sky;  and little  hope at all was
left in his heart that he would ever see any of them again.
