Chapter 10. The Black Gate Opens
Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the  Pelennor.
The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anurien, but harried
and scattered by the Rohirrim they had  broken and fled with little fighting
towards Cair  Andros;  and with  that  threat  destroyed  and  new  strength
arriving out of the South the City  was as well  manned  as might be. Scouts
reported  that  no  enemies remained  upon the  roads  east  as  far  as the
Cross-roads of the Fallen King. All now was ready for the last throw.
Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn
and Gandalf, who went in the  van with the D®nedain  and the sons of Elrond.
But Merry to his shame was not to go with them.
'You are  not fit for  such a  journey,' said  Aragorn. 'But  do not be
ashamed.  If  you do no  more  in  this  war, you have already earned  great
honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and do not grudge him
his chance of peril, for  though  he has done as well as his fortune allowed
him, he has yet to match your deed. But in truth all now are in like danger.
Though it may be our part to  find bitter end before the  Gate of Mordor, if
we do so,  then you will come also to a last  stand, either here or wherever
the black tide overtakes you. Farewell!'
And  so  despondently Merry now  stood and watched the mustering of the
army. Bergil was with him, and  he  also was downcast; for his father was to
march leading a company of the  Men  of the City:  he could not  rejoin  the
Guard until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was also to go,
as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright
figure among the tall men of Minas Tirith.
At last the  trumpets  rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop,
and company by company,  they wheeled and went off  eastward. And long
after
they had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway, Merry
stood there. The  last glint of the morning sun  on  spear and helm twinkled
and was lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling
friendless  and  alone. Everyone  that  he cared for had  gone away into the
gloom  that  hung over the distant eastern sky;  and little  hope at all was
left in his heart that he would ever see any of them again.
As if recalled by his mood of despair,  the  pain in his arm  returned,
and he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was roused by the
touch of Bergil's hand.
'Come, Master Perian!' said the lad. 'You are still  in pain, I see.  I
will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come back. The
Men  of  Minas Tirith  will never be overcome. And  now they  have the  Lord
Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.'
Ere  noon the army  came  to  Osgiliath.  There  all  the  workers  and
craftsmen  that  could  be  spared were  busy. Some were  strengthening  the
ferries and boat-bridges that the  enemy had made and in part destroyed when
they fled; some  gathered  stores and booty; and others  on the eastern side
across the River were throwing up hasty works of defence.
The vanguard passed on through the ruins  of  Old Gondor, and  over the
wide River, and  on up the long straight road that in the high days had been
made to run  from the fair  Tower of the Sun to the tall  Tower of the Moon,
which now was Minas Morgul in its accursed vale. Five miles beyond Osgiliath
they halted, ending their first day's march.
But  the  horsemen  pressed  on  and  ere  evening  they  came  to  the
Cross-roads and the great ring of trees, and all was silent. No sign of  any
enemy  had they seen, no cry or  call had been heard, no shaft had sped from
rock or  thicket by the  way, yet  ever as they went  forward  they felt the
watchfulness  of  the land  increase. Tree and stone,  blade  and leaf  were
listening. The darkness had been dispelled, and far away westward sunset was
on the  Vale of  Anduin, and the white peaks of the mountains blushed in the
blue air; but a shadow and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel D®ath.
Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the
ring  of trees,  and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds cried aloud:
'The Lords  of Gondor have returned  and all this  land  that is theirs they
take back.'  The  hideous orc-head that  was  set upon the carven figure was
cast down and  broken in pieces, and the old king's head was raised  and set
in its place once more, still crowned with white and golden flowers: and men
laboured  to wash and pare away all the foul scrawls that orcs  had put upon
the stone.
Now in their debate  some had counselled that Minas Morgul should first
be assailed, and if  they  might take  it,  it should  be utterly destroyed.
'And, maybe,'  said Imrahil, 'the road that leads thence to  the pass  above
will prove  an easier way of  assault upon the Dark Lord  than  his northern
gate.'
But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of  the evil that
dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and
horror, and because also of the  news  that Faramir had brought.  For if the
Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that  way,  then above  all they should not
draw the Eye of Mordor thither.  So the next day when the main host came up,
they set a strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor
should send a force  over the Morgul Pass, or should bring  more men up from
the South. For that guard  they chose mostly archers  who knew  the ways  of
Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting  of the
ways. But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the  vanguard  to  the  entrance  of
Morgul Vale and looked on the evil city.
It was dark and  lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of  Mordor
that  had  dwelt  there had been destroyed in  battle,  and the  Nazgyl were
abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy  with fear and enmity. Then they
broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed.
The  day  after, being the  third day  since they  set  out  from Minas
Tirith, the army  began its  northward  march along  the  road.  It was some
hundred  miles by that  way  from the  Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what
might befall  them before they  came so  far  none knew They went openly but
heedfully, with mounted scouts before them  on the road, and others on  foot
upon either  side, especially  on  the  eastward flank;  for there lay  dark
thickets, and  a tumbled  land of rocky ghylls  and crags,  behind which the
long  grim slopes of the Ephel D®ath clambered up. The weather of  the world
remained fair and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the
glooms  and the sad  mists  that clung  about  the Mountains of  Shadow; and
behind them at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in the upper winds.
Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry:
"The  Lords of Gondor are come! Let  all leave this land  or yield them up!'
But Imrahil said: 'Say not         The Lords of Gondor        .  Say  The King Elessar      .  For
that is true, even though he has  not yet  sat  upon the throne; and it will
give the Enemy more thought, if  the  heralds use that name.' And thereafter
thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none
answered the challenge.
Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming  peace,  the hearts  of all
the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile
that they went  north foreboding  of evil grew heavier  on them. It was near
