gate.'
But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of  the evil that
dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and
horror, and because also of the  news  that Faramir had brought.  For if the
Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that  way,  then above  all they should not
draw the Eye of Mordor thither.  So the next day when the main host came up,
they set a strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor
should send a force  over the Morgul Pass, or should bring  more men up from
the South. For that guard  they chose mostly archers  who knew  the ways  of
Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting  of the
ways. But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the  vanguard  to  the  entrance  of
Morgul Vale and looked on the evil city.
It was dark and  lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of  Mordor
that  had  dwelt  there had been destroyed in  battle,  and the  Nazgyl were
abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy  with fear and enmity. Then they
broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed.
The  day  after, being the  third day  since they  set  out  from Minas
Tirith, the army  began its  northward  march along  the  road.  It was some
hundred  miles by that  way  from the  Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what
might befall  them before they  came so  far  none knew They went openly but
heedfully, with mounted scouts before them  on the road, and others on  foot
upon either  side, especially  on  the  eastward flank;  for there lay  dark
thickets, and  a tumbled  land of rocky ghylls  and crags,  behind which the
long  grim slopes of the Ephel D®ath clambered up. The weather of  the world
remained fair and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the
glooms  and the sad  mists  that clung  about  the Mountains of  Shadow; and
behind them at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in the upper winds.
Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry:
"The  Lords of Gondor are come! Let  all leave this land  or yield them up!'
But Imrahil said: 'Say not         The Lords of Gondor        .  Say  The King Elessar      .  For
that is true, even though he has  not yet  sat  upon the throne; and it will
give the Enemy more thought, if  the  heralds use that name.' And thereafter
thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none
answered the challenge.
Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming  peace,  the hearts  of all
the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile
that they went  north foreboding  of evil grew heavier  on them. It was near
the  end of the second day of their  march  from  the Cross-roads  that they
first met any offer  of battle.  For a strong force  of Orcs and Easterlings
attempted to  take their leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the
very place where Faramir  had waylaid the men of Harad, and the road went in
a deep cutting through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But the Captains
of the West were well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth
Annyn
led by Mablung; and so the ambush was itself trapped. For horsemen went
wide
about westward and  came  up on the flank of  the enemy and from behind, and
they were destroyed or driven east into the hills.
But  the victory did  little to  enhearten the captains.  'It  is but a
feint,' said Aragorn; 'and its chief purpose, I deem, was  rather to draw us
on by a false guess of our Enemy's weakness than to  do us much hurt,  yet.'
And from that evening onward the Nazgyl came and followed every move  of
the
army. They still  flew  high and out  of sight of all  save Legolas, and yet
their presence could  be felt, as a deepening of shadow and a dimming of the
sun; and though the Ringwraiths did not  yet stoop low upon  their foes  and
were silent, uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off.
So time and  the hopeless  journey wore away. Upon the fourth day  from
the Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last to the end
of  the living lands,  and began to pass into the desolation that lay before
the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and  they could  descry the  marshes
and the desert that  stretched north and west to  the Emyn Muil. So desolate
were those places and so  deep  the horror that lay on them that some of the
host were unmanned, and they could neither walk nor ride further north.
Aragorn looked  at them,  and there was pity  in his  eyes  rather than
wrath;  for  these were young men from Rohan,  from Westfold  far  away,  or
husbandmen  from  Lossarnach, and to them Mordor had been  from childhood
a
name  of evil,  and yet  unreal, a  legend that had no part in  their simple
life; and now  they walked like men in a  hideous dream made true,  and they
understood not this war nor why fate should lead them to such a pass.
'Go!' said Aragorn. 'But  keep what honour you may, and do not run! And
there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed. Take your
way  south-west till you come to Cair Andros, and  if that is still  held by
enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the last in
defence of Gondor and Rohan!'
Then some being shamed by  his mercy  overcame their fear and  went on,
and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful  deed within their measure
that  they  could turn to, and they  departed.  And so,  since many men  had
already  been left  at the Cross-roads,  it was with less than six thousands
that the Captains of the West came at last  to challenge the  Black Gate and
the might of Mordor.
They advanced  now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their
challenge, and they drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out
scouts or small parties from the main host. At nightfall of the fifth day of
the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires about it
of such dead wood and  heath as they  could find. They  passed the hours  of
night  in  wakefulness  and they were aware  of many things  half-seen  that
walked and prowled all about them, and they heard the howling of wolves. The
wind had  died  and all  the air  seemed still. They  could see  little, for
though it was cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights  old, there were
smokes  and  fumes  that rose  out of the earth and  the white  crescent was
shrouded in the mists of Mordor.
It grew cold. As morning came the wind began to stir again,  but now it
came from  the North,  and  soon it  freshened to a  rising breeze. All  the
night-walkers were gone, and the land seemed empty. North amid their
noisome
pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken  rock and
blasted earth,  the vomit of the maggot-folk of Mordor;  but south  and  now
near loomed the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost,
and the two Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side. For in their
last march  the Captains had turned away from the old road as it  bent east,
and avoided the peril of the lurking hills, and so now they were approaching
the Morannon from the north-west, even as Frodo had done.
The two  vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were
fast closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All was  silent  but
watchful. They  were come to the last end of their folly, and stood  forlorn
and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which their
army could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines
of great power, and  the Enemy had no more force than would suffice  for the
manning of  the gate  and wall alone. Yet  they  knew that all the hills and
