enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the last in
defence of Gondor and Rohan!'
Then some being shamed by  his mercy  overcame their fear and  went on,
and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful  deed within their measure
that  they  could turn to, and they  departed.  And so,  since many men  had
already  been left  at the Cross-roads,  it was with less than six thousands
that the Captains of the West came at last  to challenge the  Black Gate and
the might of Mordor.
They advanced  now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their
challenge, and they drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out
scouts or small parties from the main host. At nightfall of the fifth day of
the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires about it
of such dead wood and  heath as they  could find. They  passed the hours  of
night  in  wakefulness  and they were aware  of many things  half-seen  that
walked and prowled all about them, and they heard the howling of wolves. The
wind had  died  and all  the air  seemed still. They  could see  little, for
though it was cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights  old, there were
smokes  and  fumes  that rose  out of the earth and  the white  crescent was
shrouded in the mists of Mordor.
It grew cold. As morning came the wind began to stir again,  but now it
came from  the North,  and  soon it  freshened to a  rising breeze. All  the
night-walkers were gone, and the land seemed empty. North amid their
noisome
pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken  rock and
blasted earth,  the vomit of the maggot-folk of Mordor;  but south  and  now
near loomed the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost,
and the two Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side. For in their
last march  the Captains had turned away from the old road as it  bent east,
and avoided the peril of the lurking hills, and so now they were approaching
the Morannon from the north-west, even as Frodo had done.
The two  vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were
fast closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All was  silent  but
watchful. They  were come to the last end of their folly, and stood  forlorn
and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which their
army could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines
of great power, and  the Enemy had no more force than would suffice  for the
manning of  the gate  and wall alone. Yet  they  knew that all the hills and
rocks  about  the Morannon  were filled with hidden  foes, and  the  shadowy
defile beyond was bored and tunnelled  by teeming broods of evil things. And
as they stood they saw all the Nazgyl gathered together, hovering  above the
Towers of the Teeth like vultures; and they knew that they were watched. But
still the Enemy made no sign.
No  choice was left them but to play their part  to  its end. Therefore
Aragorn now set the host in such array as could  best be contrived; and they
were drawn up on two great  hills of blasted stone and earth  that orcs  had
piled in years of labour. Before them towards Mordor lay like a moat a great
mire  of  reeking  mud and foul-smelling  pools. When all  was  ordered, the
Captains rode  forth towards the Black Gate with  a great  guard of horsemen
and  the  banner and heralds  and  trumpeters.  There  was Gandalf as  chief
herald,  and  Aragorn  with  the sons of Elrond,  and  Jomer  of Rohan,  and
Imrahil; and Legolas and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to  go also, so that
all the enemies of Mordor should have a witness.
They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew
upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent their voices up over
the battlement of Mordor.
'Come forth!'  they cried. 'Let the Lord of the Black  Land come forth!
Justice shall be done upon  him. For wrongfully he  has made war upon Gondor
and  wrested its lands. Therefore the King  of Gondor demands that he should
atone for his evils, and depart then for ever. Come forth!'
There was  a long  silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound  was
heard in  answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans,  and he had a  mind
first to play these mice cruelly before he struck to kill.  So  it was that,
even  as  the  Captains were about to  turn  away, the  silence  was  broken
suddenly.  There came  a  long rolling  of great  drums like thunder in  the
mountains,  and  then  a  braying  of horns that  shook the very  stones and
stunned men's ears.  And thereupon the  middle  door  of the Black Gate  was
thrown open with a great clang, and out of it there came an embassy from the
Dark Tower.
At its  head there rode a  tall  and evil  shape, mounted  upon a black
horse, if  horse it was;  for it was huge  and hideous,  and its face was  a
frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head,  and in the sockets of
its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a flame. The  rider was robed  all
in  black, and black was his lofty helm;  yet this  was  no Ringwraith but a
living man. The Lieutenant of the Tower of Barad-dyr he was, and his name is
remembered  in no  tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he said: 'I am
the Mouth of Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the
race of those  that are named the Black  N®menureans;  for  they established
their dwellings in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron's domination, and
they worshipped him, being enamoured  of evil knowledge.  And he entered the
service of the  Dark Tower when it  first rose again,  and  because  of  his
cunning he grew  ever  higher  in the Lord's favour;  and  he learned  great
sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and he was more cruel than
any
orc.
He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company  of
black-harnessed soldiery, and a  single  banner, black but  bearing on it in
red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the Captains of the West he
looked them up and down and laughed.
'Is  there  anyone in this rout  with authority to treat  with me?'  he
asked. 'Or indeed with wit to  understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked,
turning to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to make a king than a piece of
elvish glass, or a rabble  such as this. Why, any brigand  of the  hills can
show as good a following!'
Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it,
and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did not stir nor
move hand to weapon, the other  quailed and  gave back as if menaced with  a
blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, and may not be assailed!' he cried.
'Where such  laws hold,'  said  Gandalf, 'it is  also  the  custom  for
ambassadors to use less insolence. But  no one  has threatened you. You have
naught to fear  from us,  until your errand is done. But unless  your master
has  come  to new  wisdom, then with all  his servants  you will be in great
peril.'
'So!' said the  Messenger. 'Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard?
Have we not  heard of  thee at whiles, and  of thy wanderings, ever hatching
plots and mischief at a safe distance? But this time thou hast stuck out thy
nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him  who sets
his foolish webs before  the feet of Sauron the Great. I have  tokens that I
was bidden  to show to thee -  to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to
come.' He signed to  one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle
swathed in black cloths.
The Messenger put  these  aside, and there to the wonder and  dismay of
