remembered  in no  tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he said: 'I am
the Mouth of Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the
race of those  that are named the Black  N®menureans;  for  they established
their dwellings in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron's domination, and
they worshipped him, being enamoured  of evil knowledge.  And he entered the
service of the  Dark Tower when it  first rose again,  and  because  of  his
cunning he grew  ever  higher  in the Lord's favour;  and  he learned  great
sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and he was more cruel than
any
orc.
He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company  of
black-harnessed soldiery, and a  single  banner, black but  bearing on it in
red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the Captains of the West he
looked them up and down and laughed.
'Is  there  anyone in this rout  with authority to treat  with me?'  he
asked. 'Or indeed with wit to  understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked,
turning to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to make a king than a piece of
elvish glass, or a rabble  such as this. Why, any brigand  of the  hills can
show as good a following!'
Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it,
and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did not stir nor
move hand to weapon, the other  quailed and  gave back as if menaced with  a
blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, and may not be assailed!' he cried.
'Where such  laws hold,'  said  Gandalf, 'it is  also  the  custom  for
ambassadors to use less insolence. But  no one  has threatened you. You have
naught to fear  from us,  until your errand is done. But unless  your master
has  come  to new  wisdom, then with all  his servants  you will be in great
peril.'
'So!' said the  Messenger. 'Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard?
Have we not  heard of  thee at whiles, and  of thy wanderings, ever hatching
plots and mischief at a safe distance? But this time thou hast stuck out thy
nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him  who sets
his foolish webs before  the feet of Sauron the Great. I have  tokens that I
was bidden  to show to thee -  to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to
come.' He signed to  one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle
swathed in black cloths.
The Messenger put  these  aside, and there to the wonder and  dismay of
all the Captains he held up first the short sword that Sam had carried,  and
next a grey  cloak with  an elven-brooch,  and last the coat of mithril-mail
that  Frodo  had  worn  wrapped  in  his tattered garments. A blackness came
before their eyes,  and it seemed  to  them in a moment of  silence that the
world  stood  still,  but their  hearts were dead and their last  hope gone.
Pippin who stood behind Prince Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.
'Silence!' said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back;  but the Messenger
laughed aloud.
'So you  have yet another of these imps  with you!' he cried. 'What use
you  find in them I cannot guess; but to send them as  spies into Mordor  is
beyond even your  accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for it is plain that
this brat  at  least has seen these tokens  before, and it would be vain for
you to deny them now.'
'I do not wish to  deny  them,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed, I know them  all
and all  their history,  and despite your scorn,  foul Mouth of  Sauron, you
cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?'
'Dwarf-coat,  elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the
little rat-land  of the Shire-nay; do not  start! We know it well - here are
the marks  of a  conspiracy. Now,  maybe  he that bore  these  things was  a
creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe otherwise: one dear to
you, perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with what little wit is left to you.
For  Sauron does not love  spies, and what his fate  shall be depends now on
your choice.'
No one answered him;  but he  saw their faces  grey with  fear and  the
horror  in their eyes, and he laughed again, for it  seemed to him  that his
sport went well. 'Good, good!' he  said. 'He was dear to you, I see. Or else
his  errand was one that you did not wish to fail? It  has. And now he shall
endure the slow torment of years, as long and  slow as our arts in the Great
Tower can contrive, and never  be released,  unless maybe when he is changed
and  broken,  so  that  he may come  to you, and you shall see what you have
done. This shall surely be-unless you accept my Lord's terms.'
'Name  the  terms,'  said Gandalf steadily,  but  those nearby  saw the
anguish in  his  face,  and now he  seemed an  old and wizened man, crushed,
defeated at last. They did not doubt that he would accept.
'These are the terms,' said the  Messenger, and smiled as he eyed  them
one by one. 'The rabble of  Gondor and  its deluded allies shall withdraw at
once beyond the Anduin, first taking oaths never  again to assail Sauron the
Great  in arms, open or  secret. All lands east of Anduin  shall be Sauron's
for  ever, solely. West of the Anduin as  far as the Misty Mountains and the
Gap of Rohan  shall  be tributary to  Mordor,  and men  there  shall bear no
weapons, but shall  have leave to govern  their own affairs. But  they shall
help  to rebuild Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall
be Sauron's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more
worthy of trust.'
Looking in  the Messenger's  eyes they read his thought.  He was to  be
that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under his sway; he
would be their tyrant and they his slaves.
But Gandalf said:  'This is much  to demand for  the  delivery  of  one
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight
many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so
that  he falls to haggling? And  if indeed we rated this  prisoner  so high,
what  surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his
part? Where  is this prisoner?  Let him be brought forth and yielded to  us,
and then we will consider these demands.'
It  seemed then to Gandalf,  intent, watching  him as a  man engaged in
fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was
at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again.
'Do  not bandy words in  your  insolence with  the Mouth of Sauron!' he
cried. 'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you
must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!'
'These  we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast  aside  his cloak
and a white  light shone forth like a sword in that black  place. Before his
upraised hand  the  foul Messenger recoiled, and  Gandalf  coming seized and
took from him  the tokens: coat,  cloak, and sword. 'These we  will take  in
memory of our friend,' he cried.  'But  as for your  terms, we  reject  them
utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We
did not  come here  to waste words in treating  with Sauron,  faithless  and
accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!'
Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with
amazement and anger to the  likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches
on  its  prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod. Rage filled him
and his mouth  slavered, and shapeless  sounds of fury came  strangling from
his throat. But he looked at the fell faces of the Captains and their deadly
eyes, and fear overcame his wrath. He  gave a great cry, and  turned, leaped
