Great  in arms, open or  secret. All lands east of Anduin  shall be Sauron's
for  ever, solely. West of the Anduin as  far as the Misty Mountains and the
Gap of Rohan  shall  be tributary to  Mordor,  and men  there  shall bear no
weapons, but shall  have leave to govern  their own affairs. But  they shall
help  to rebuild Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall
be Sauron's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more
worthy of trust.'
Looking in  the Messenger's  eyes they read his thought.  He was to  be
that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under his sway; he
would be their tyrant and they his slaves.
But Gandalf said:  'This is much  to demand for  the  delivery  of  one
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight
many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so
that  he falls to haggling? And  if indeed we rated this  prisoner  so high,
what  surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his
part? Where  is this prisoner?  Let him be brought forth and yielded to  us,
and then we will consider these demands.'
It  seemed then to Gandalf,  intent, watching  him as a  man engaged in
fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was
at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again.
'Do  not bandy words in  your  insolence with  the Mouth of Sauron!' he
cried. 'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you
must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!'
'These  we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast  aside  his cloak
and a white  light shone forth like a sword in that black  place. Before his
upraised hand  the  foul Messenger recoiled, and  Gandalf  coming seized and
took from him  the tokens: coat,  cloak, and sword. 'These we  will take  in
memory of our friend,' he cried.  'But  as for your  terms, we  reject  them
utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We
did not  come here  to waste words in treating  with Sauron,  faithless  and
accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!'
Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with
amazement and anger to the  likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches
on  its  prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod. Rage filled him
and his mouth  slavered, and shapeless  sounds of fury came  strangling from
his throat. But he looked at the fell faces of the Captains and their deadly
eyes, and fear overcame his wrath. He  gave a great cry, and  turned, leaped
upon his  steed, and with his company galloped madly back to  Cirith Gorgor.
But  as they went his soldiers blew their horns in signal long arranged; and
even before they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap.
Drums rolled and fires leaped up.  The  great doors  of the  Black Gate
swung  back wide. Out  of  it streamed a great host  as  swiftly as swirling
waters when a sluice is lifted.
The Captains mounted  again  and rode back, and from the host of Mordor
there went up a jeering yell. Dust  rose smothering the air,  as from nearby
there marched up an army of Easterlings  that  had  waited for the signal in
the shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further Tower.  Down from the hills on
either side of  the  Morannon poured Orcs innumerable. The men of  the  West
were  trapped, and soon. all about  the grey mounds where they stood, forces
ten times and more than ten times  their  match  would ring them in a sea of
enemies. Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel.
Little  time was left to Aragorn for the ordering  of  his battle. Upon
the one hill he  stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was raised
the  banner of  the  Tree and  Stars.  Upon the other hill hard by stood the
banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver Swan. And about
each
hill a ring was made facing all ways, bristling with spear and sword. But in
the front  towards Mordor  where the  first bitter  assault would come there
stood the sons of Elrond on  the left with the D®nedain  about them,  and on
the right  the  Prince Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair, and
picked men of the Tower of Guard.
The  wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and  arrows whined; but the  sun
now  climbing  towards  the South was  veiled  in the reeks  of Mordor,  and
through a threatening haze it  gleamed, remote, a  sullen red, as if it were
the ending of the day, or the  end maybe of all the world of  light. And out
of the gathering  mirk the Nazgyl came with. their  cold voices crying words
of death; and then all hope was quenched.
Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when  he  heard Gandalf reject the
terms and  doom Frodo  to the torment  of  the  Tower;  but  he had mastered
himself, and now he  stood beside Beregond in the front  rank of Gondor with
Imrahil's men. For  it seemed best to him to die  soon and  leave the bitter
story of his life, since all was in ruin.
'I wish Merry  was here,' he  heard himself saying, and quick  thoughts
raced  through his mind, even as he watched  the enemy  come charging to the
assault. 'Well, well, now at  any rate  I understand  poor Denethor a little
better. We might die together, Merry and  I, and since die we must, why not?
Well, as he is not  here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do
my best.'
He drew  his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red
and gold; and  the flowing characters of N®menor glinted like fire upon  the
blade. 'This was made for just  such an hour,' he thought. 'If only  I could
smite that foul Messenger with  it, then almost I should draw level with old
Merry.  Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I
could see cool sunlight and green grass again!'
Then  even  as he thought  these things the  first assault crashed into
them.  The orcs hindered by the  mires that  lay before the hills halted and
poured their arrows into the defending ranks.  But through them  there  came
striding  up,  roaring  like beasts, a  great company of  hill-trolls out of
Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in
close-fitting mesh of  horny  scales, or maybe  that was their hideous hide;
but they bore round  bucklers  huge and black and wielded heavy  hammers  in
their  knotted hands.  Reckless they sprang into the pools and waded across,
bellowing as they came. Like a  storm they broke upon the line of the men of
Gondor, and beat upon helm and head, and arm and shield as smiths hewing the
hot bending iron. At Pippin's  side Beregond was stunned  and overborne, and
he fell;  and the great  troll-chief that  smote  him  down  bent over  him,
reaching out  a  clutching  claw; for  these  fell creatures would bite  the
throats of those that they threw down.
Then  Pippin  stabbed  upwards, and  the  written blade of  Westernesse
pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his
black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and came crashing down
like
a falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and crushing
pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness.
'So  it ends  as I  guessed  it  would,' his  thought said,  even as it
fluttered away; and  it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost  gay
it seemed to  be  casting off at last all doubt and care and  fear. And then
even as  it  winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed
to be crying in some forgotten world far above:
'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!'
For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered.  'Bilbo!'  it  said. 'But
