assault. 'Well, well, now at  any rate  I understand  poor Denethor a little
better. We might die together, Merry and  I, and since die we must, why not?
Well, as he is not  here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do
my best.'
He drew  his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red
and gold; and  the flowing characters of N®menor glinted like fire upon  the
blade. 'This was made for just  such an hour,' he thought. 'If only  I could
smite that foul Messenger with  it, then almost I should draw level with old
Merry.  Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I
could see cool sunlight and green grass again!'
Then  even  as he thought  these things the  first assault crashed into
them.  The orcs hindered by the  mires that  lay before the hills halted and
poured their arrows into the defending ranks.  But through them  there  came
striding  up,  roaring  like beasts, a  great company of  hill-trolls out of
Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in
close-fitting mesh of  horny  scales, or maybe  that was their hideous hide;
but they bore round  bucklers  huge and black and wielded heavy  hammers  in
their  knotted hands.  Reckless they sprang into the pools and waded across,
bellowing as they came. Like a  storm they broke upon the line of the men of
Gondor, and beat upon helm and head, and arm and shield as smiths hewing the
hot bending iron. At Pippin's  side Beregond was stunned  and overborne, and
he fell;  and the great  troll-chief that  smote  him  down  bent over  him,
reaching out  a  clutching  claw; for  these  fell creatures would bite  the
throats of those that they threw down.
Then  Pippin  stabbed  upwards, and  the  written blade of  Westernesse
pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his
black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and came crashing down
like
a falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and crushing
pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness.
'So  it ends  as I  guessed  it  would,' his  thought said,  even as it
fluttered away; and  it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost  gay
it seemed to  be  casting off at last all doubt and care and  fear. And then
even as  it  winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed
to be crying in some forgotten world far above:
'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!'
For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered.  'Bilbo!'  it  said. 'But
no! That came in his tale, long long  ago. This is my  tale, and it is ended
now. Good-bye!' And his thought fled far away and his eyes saw no more.
* BOOK VI *
Chapter 1. The Tower of Cirith Ungol
Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a  moment he wondered
where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to him. He was in
the deep dark outside the  under-gate of the orcs'  stronghold;  its  brazen
doors were shut. He must have fallen  stunned when he hurled himself against
them; but  how  long he had lain there he did not know. Then he  had been on
fire, desperate and furious;  now he was shivering and cold. He crept to the
doors and pressed his ears against them.
Far  within  he  could hear  faintly the voices of ores clamouring, but
soon they stopped or  passed out of hearing,  and  all was still.  His  head
ached and his eyes saw phantom lights in  the  darkness, but he struggled to
steady  himself and  think. It  was clear at any rate that he had no hope of
getting into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait  there for days before
it was opened, and he could not wait: time  was  desperately precious. He no
longer had any doubt about his duty: he must rescue  his master or perish in
the attempt.
'The  perishing is more  likely, and will be a lot  easier  anyway,' he
said grimly to  himself,  as  he sheathed Sting and turned  from  the brazen
doors. Slowly  he  groped his  way back in  the dark along  the  tunnel, not
daring to  use the elven-light; and as  he went he tried to fit together the
events since Frodo and he  had left  the  Cross-roads. He  wondered what the
time  was. Somewhere between one day and the next, he supposed;  but even of
the days he had  quite lost count. He  was in a  land  of darkness where the
days of the world seemed forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten
too.
'I wonder if they  think of us at all,' he said, 'and what is happening
to them all away there.' He  waved his  hand vaguely  in the air before him;
but  he  was  in fact now facing southwards,  as  he  came back to  Shelob's
tunnel, not  west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the
fourteenth day of  March in the  Shire-reckoning. And  even now  Aragorn was
leading  the  black  fleet  from  Pelargir,  and  Merry was riding with  the
