'The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed.
'Yes, the Ring,' said  Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't  allow for
the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring
for years - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded
it  as  secret,  I  kept  the  knowledge  in  my  head, until we formed  our
conspiracy. I  did not know Bilbo, of course, as  well as I know you; I  was
too young, and he was also more careful - but  he was not careful enough. If
you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.'
'Go on!' said Frodo faintly.
'It was  the  Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall,  as you might
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the
road, when I  saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared,
coming towards us.  Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he  vanished.  I
was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary
fashion; but  I got through the hedge and walked along the  field inside.  I
was  peeping  through into the road,  after the S.-B.s  had  passed, and was
looking  straight at Bilbo  when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of
gold as he put something back in his trouser-pocket.
'After that I kept my  eyes open.  In fact, I confess that I spied. But
you must  admit that it was very  intriguing, and I was only in my teens.  I
must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the
old fellow's secret book.'
'You have read his book!' cried Frodo.  'Good heavens above! Is nothing
safe?'
'Not  too safe, I should say,' said  Merry.  'But  I have  only had one
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I
wonder what became  of it. I should  like  another look.  Have you  got  it,
Frodo?'
'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.'
'Well, as  I  was saying,' Merry  proceeded, 'I  kept my  knowledge  to
myself,  till  this Spring  when  things got  serious. Then  we  formed  our
conspiracy;  and  as we were serious, too,  and meant business,  we have not
been too scrupulous. You are  not a very easy  nut to crack,  and Gandalf is
worse. But if  you want to be  introduced  to our chief investigator, I  can
produce him.'
'Where is  he?' said  Frodo, looking round, as if he  expected a masked
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard.
'Step forward, Sam!'  said Merry; and  Sam stood up with a face scarlet
up to  the ears.  'Here's our collector of  information! And he  collected a
lot, I  can tell you, before he was finally  caught. After which, I may say,
he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.'
'Sam!' cried  Frodo,  feeling that amazement could  go no  further, and
quite  unable  to decide whether he felt angry,  amused, relieved, or merely
foolish.
'Yes, sir!' said Sam.  'Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant  no wrong
to you, Mr.  Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf  for that matter.               He    has some sense,
mind you; and when you  said            go alone,    he  said  no! lake someone as you can
trust.'
'But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,' said Frodo.  Sam looked
at him unhappily.  'It all depends on what you want,' put in Merry. 'You can
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you
can trust us to keep any secret of yours - closer than you keep it yourself.
But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off  without a
word. We  are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what
Gandalf has  told you. We know  a good deal about the Ring. We  are horribly
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.'
'And after all, sir,'  added Sam,  'you did  ought to  take the  Elves'
advice.  Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you can't deny
it.'
'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'I
don't  deny it, but I'll never believe you  are  sleeping again, whether you
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.
'You are a set  of deceitful  scoundrels!'  he  said,  turning  to  the
others. 'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give
in. I will take Gildor's  advice.  If the danger were not  so dark, I should
dance for joy. Even so,  I cannot  help feeling  happy; happier than I  have
felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.'
'Good!  That's  settled. Three cheers  for  Captain Frodo and company!'
they shouted;  and  they  danced round him. Merry and  Pippin  began a song,
which they had apparently got ready for the occasion.
It was made on  the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo  on  his
adventure long ago, and went to the same tune:
Farewell we call to hearth and hall!
Though wind may blow and rain may fall,
We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.
To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,
Through moor and waste we ride in haste,
And whither then we cannot tell.
With foes ahead, behind us dread,
Beneath the sky shall be our bed,
Until at last our toil be passed,
Our journey done, our errand sped.
We must away! We must away!
We ride before the break of day!
'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for tonight at any rate.'
'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before
the break of day?'
'I don't know,' answered  Frodo. 'I fear those  Black Riders, and  I am
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in  a place to which
it is known  I was going. Also Gildor advised me  not to wait. But I  should
very  much like  to see  Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed
when  he heard that Gandalf  had never  appeared. It really  depends  on two
things.  How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how  soon could
we
get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.'
'The answer to the  second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except  for
a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.'
'It seems to have been  a  very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?'
'That all depends on  what you think the Riders would do, if they found
you here,' answered Merry. 'They            could   have reached here  by now, of course,
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the
river-bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them
