* BOOK VI *
Chapter 1. The Tower of Cirith Ungol
Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a  moment he wondered
where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to him. He was in
the deep dark outside the  under-gate of the orcs'  stronghold;  its  brazen
doors were shut. He must have fallen  stunned when he hurled himself against
them; but  how  long he had lain there he did not know. Then he  had been on
fire, desperate and furious;  now he was shivering and cold. He crept to the
doors and pressed his ears against them.
Far  within  he  could hear  faintly the voices of ores clamouring, but
soon they stopped or  passed out of hearing,  and  all was still.  His  head
ached and his eyes saw phantom lights in  the  darkness, but he struggled to
steady  himself and  think. It  was clear at any rate that he had no hope of
getting into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait  there for days before
it was opened, and he could not wait: time  was  desperately precious. He no
longer had any doubt about his duty: he must rescue  his master or perish in
the attempt.
'The  perishing is more  likely, and will be a lot  easier  anyway,' he
said grimly to  himself,  as  he sheathed Sting and turned  from  the brazen
doors. Slowly  he  groped his  way back in  the dark along  the  tunnel, not
daring to  use the elven-light; and as  he went he tried to fit together the
events since Frodo and he  had left  the  Cross-roads. He  wondered what the
time  was. Somewhere between one day and the next, he supposed;  but even of
the days he had  quite lost count. He  was in a  land  of darkness where the
days of the world seemed forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten
too.
'I wonder if they  think of us at all,' he said, 'and what is happening
to them all away there.' He  waved his  hand vaguely  in the air before him;
but  he  was  in fact now facing southwards,  as  he  came back to  Shelob's
tunnel, not  west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the
fourteenth day of  March in the  Shire-reckoning. And  even now  Aragorn was
leading  the  black  fleet  from  Pelargir,  and  Merry was riding with  the
Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in Minas Tirith flames were rising
and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all
their cares and  fear  the thoughts of  their friends  turned  constantly to
Frodo and Sam. They were not forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no
thought could yet  bring any help to Samwise  Hamfast's son; he was  utterly
alone.
He came back at last to the  stone door of the  orc-passage, and  still
unable to  discover the catch  or bolt that held it,  he scrambled  over  as
before and dropped softly to  the ground. Then he made his way stealthily to
the  outlet of Shelob's tunnel, where the rags  of  her great web were still
blowing and swaying in the  cold airs. For cold they seemed to Sam after the
noisome darkness behind;  but the  breath of  them  revived  him.  He  crept
cautiously out.
All was ominously quiet.  The light was no more than that of dusk  at a
dark day's end. The vast vapours that  arose in  Mordor and  went  streaming
westward passed  low overhead,  a  great  welter of cloud and smoke now  lit
again beneath with a sullen glow of red.
Sam  looked up  towards the orc-tower, and  suddenly  from  its  narrow
windows lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if they were some
signal.  His fear  of  the orcs,  forgotten  for  a  while  in his wrath and
desperation,  now returned. As  far  as he  could  see, there  was only  one
possible course  for him to take: he  must go on  and try to find  the  main
entrance to  the dreadful tower; but his knees  felt weak, and he found that
he was trembling. Drawing his eyes  down from the tower and the horns of the
Cleft  before  him, he forced  his unwilling  feet  to obey him, and slowly,
listening  with all  his  ears, peering into the dense shadows of  the rocks
beside the way, he  retraced his steps, past the place where Frodo fell, and
still the  stench of Shelob lingered,  and  then  on  and up, until he stood
again in the very  cleft where  he had  put  on the Ring  and seen Shagrat's
company go by.
There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive himself  no
further. He  felt that if once he went beyond the crown of the pass and took
one  step  veritably  down  into the land  of  Mordor, that  step  would  be
irrevocable. He could never come back. Without any clear purpose he drew out
the  Ring  and put it  on again. Immediately he felt the great burden of its
weight, and  felt afresh,  but  now more  strong  and urgent than ever,  the
malice of the Eye of Mordor, searching, trying to pierce the shadows that it
had made for its own defence, but which now  hindered it in its  unquiet and
doubt.
As before, Sam found  that his  hearing was sharpened, but  that to his
sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky walls of the
path were pale, as if seen through  a mist, but still at a distance he heard
the bubbling of Shelob in her misery: and harsh and clear, and very close it
seemed, he  heard cries  and the clash of metal. He sprang to his  feet, and
pressed himself against the wall beside  the road. He was glad of the  Ring,
for here was  yet another company of orcs on  the  march. Or so  at first he
thought.  Then suddenly  he realized that  it  was not so,  his  hearing had
deceived him: the orc-cries came from the tower, whose topmost  horn was
now
right above him, on the left hand of the Cleft.
Sam shuddered and tried  to force  himself to  move.  There was plainly
some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all  orders  the  cruelty of  the
orcs  had mastered them, and  they were tormenting Frodo,  or  even savagely
hacking  him  to pieces. He listened; and as he did  a gleam of hope came to
him. There could  not  be much  doubt: there was fighting in  the tower, the
orcs  must be at war among themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to
blows.
Faint as was the  hope that his  guess brought him, it  was enough to  rouse
him.  There might be just a  chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other
thoughts, and forgetting his peril he cried aloud: 'I'm coming, Mr. Frodo!'
He ran  forward to  the  climbing path, and  over it.  At once the road
turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor.
He took off  the  Ring, moved  it may be  by some  deep premonition  of
danger,  though  to  himself he  thought  only that  he wished  to see  more
clearly. `Better have a look at the worst,' he muttered. `No good blundering
about in a fog!'
Hard and cruel and bitter  was the land  that met his gaze.  Before his
feet the highest ridge  of the Ephel D®ath fell steeply in great cliffs down
into a  dark trough, on the further side  of which there rose another ridge,
much lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out
black  against the red light  behind them: it was the grim Morgai, the inner
ring of the fences  of  the land. Far  beyond it, but almost straight ahead,
