malice of the Eye of Mordor, searching, trying to pierce the shadows that it
had made for its own defence, but which now  hindered it in its  unquiet and
doubt.
As before, Sam found  that his  hearing was sharpened, but  that to his
sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky walls of the
path were pale, as if seen through  a mist, but still at a distance he heard
the bubbling of Shelob in her misery: and harsh and clear, and very close it
seemed, he  heard cries  and the clash of metal. He sprang to his  feet, and
pressed himself against the wall beside  the road. He was glad of the  Ring,
for here was  yet another company of orcs on  the  march. Or so  at first he
thought.  Then suddenly  he realized that  it  was not so,  his  hearing had
deceived him: the orc-cries came from the tower, whose topmost  horn was
now
right above him, on the left hand of the Cleft.
Sam shuddered and tried  to force  himself to  move.  There was plainly
some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all  orders  the  cruelty of  the
orcs  had mastered them, and  they were tormenting Frodo,  or  even savagely
hacking  him  to pieces. He listened; and as he did  a gleam of hope came to
him. There could  not  be much  doubt: there was fighting in  the tower, the
orcs  must be at war among themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to
blows.
Faint as was the  hope that his  guess brought him, it  was enough to  rouse
him.  There might be just a  chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other
thoughts, and forgetting his peril he cried aloud: 'I'm coming, Mr. Frodo!'
He ran  forward to  the  climbing path, and  over it.  At once the road
turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor.
He took off  the  Ring, moved  it may be  by some  deep premonition  of
danger,  though  to  himself he  thought  only that  he wished  to see  more
clearly. `Better have a look at the worst,' he muttered. `No good blundering
about in a fog!'
Hard and cruel and bitter  was the land  that met his gaze.  Before his
feet the highest ridge  of the Ephel D®ath fell steeply in great cliffs down
into a  dark trough, on the further side  of which there rose another ridge,
much lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out
black  against the red light  behind them: it was the grim Morgai, the inner
ring of the fences  of  the land. Far  beyond it, but almost straight ahead,
across a wide  lake  of darkness dotted  with  tiny fires, there was a great
burning glow; and from it rose  in huge columns a swirling smoke,  dusty red
at the  roots, black above  where it merged into the  billowing canopy  that
roofed in all the accursed land.
Sam was looking  at Orodruin,  the Mountain of  Fire. Ever and anon the
furnaces far  below  its ashen  cone would grow hot and with a great surging
and  throbbing pour  forth rivers of  molten rock from chasms  in its sides.
Some would  flow blazing towards  Barad-dyr down  great channels; some
would
wind their way into the  stony plain, until they cooled and lay like twisted
dragon-shapes vomited from  the tormented earth.  In such an hour of  labour
Sam beheld  Mount Doom, and the light  of it, cut off by the high  screen of
the Ephel D®ath from those who climbed up the path from the West, now
glared
against the stark rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched with blood.
In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his  left,
he could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The horn that he
had  seen from the other side was only its topmost turret. Its  eastern face
stood up  in three great tiers from a shelf in the mountain-wall far  below;
its back was to a  great  cliff behind, from which it  jutted out in pointed
bastions, one above the other, diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of
cunning  masonry  that looked north-east  and  south-east. About the  lowest
tier, two hundred feet below where Sam now  stood, there was a  battlemented
wall  enclosing a narrow court.  Its gate, upon the near south-eastern side,
opened  on a broad road,  the outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a
precipice, until it turned southward and went winding down into the darkness
to  join the road that came  over the Morgul Pass. Then on it went through a
jagged  rift in the  Morgai  out  into the  valley of Gorgoroth  and away to
Barad-dyr.  The  narrow upper way on which  Sam stood leapt  swiftly down
by
stair and steep path to meet the main road under the frowning walls close to
the Tower-gate.
As he gazed at it  suddenly Sam understood, almost  with a shock,  that
this stronghold had been  built  not to  keep enemies out of  Mordor, but to
keep them in. It was indeed one  of the works of Gondor long ago, an eastern
outpost of the defences of Ithilien, made when, after the Last Alliance, Men
of  Westernesse kept  watch on  the evil land of  Sauron where his creatures
still lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so
here too the vigilance had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to
the Lord of the Ringwraiths, and now for long years it had been held by evil
things. Since his return to Mordor, Sauron had found  it useful; for he  had
few servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief  purpose as of old
was to prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy were so rash as to try
to  enter that  land  secretly, then it  was also  a  last  unsleeping guard
against any that might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob.
Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down
under those many-eyed  walls and pass the watchful gate. And even  if he did
so, he  could not go  far  on  the guarded road beyond:  not even  the black
shadows,  lying  deep where  the red glow could not reach, would shield  him
long from the night-eyed orcs. But desperate as that road might be, his task
was now far worse: not to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone.
His  thought turned to the Ring, but there was  no  comfort there, only
dread and danger. No  sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, burning
far
away, than he was aware of a change in his burden. As it drew near the great
furnaces  where,  in the deeps of time, it had been shaped  and forged,  the
Ring's power grew, and  it became more fell, untameable  save by some mighty
will. As Sam stood there, even though the Ring was not on him but hanging by
its chain about his neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a
huge distorted shadow of  himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the
walls of  Mordor. He  felt  that he had  from now on  only two  choices:  to
forbear the Ring, though it would torment him; or to claim it, and challenge
the Power that sat in  its dark hold beyond the valley  of  shadows. Already
the Ring tempted him, gnawing at his will and  reason.  Wild fantasies arose
in his mind; and he saw Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a
flaming sword across the darkened land, and armies flocking  to  his call as
he  marched to the  overthrow of  Barad-dyr. And then all the  clouds rolled
away,  and the white sun  shone, and  at his command the  vale of  Gorgoroth
became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit. He had only to
put on the Ring and claim it for his own, and all this could be.
In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to
hold  him firm; but also deep  down in him lived still unconquered his plain
hobbit-sense: he  knew in the core of his heart that he was not large enough
