still lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so
here too the vigilance had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to
the Lord of the Ringwraiths, and now for long years it had been held by evil
things. Since his return to Mordor, Sauron had found  it useful; for he  had
few servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief  purpose as of old
was to prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy were so rash as to try
to  enter that  land  secretly, then it  was also  a  last  unsleeping guard
against any that might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob.
Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down
under those many-eyed  walls and pass the watchful gate. And even  if he did
so, he  could not go  far  on  the guarded road beyond:  not even  the black
shadows,  lying  deep where  the red glow could not reach, would shield  him
long from the night-eyed orcs. But desperate as that road might be, his task
was now far worse: not to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone.
His  thought turned to the Ring, but there was  no  comfort there, only
dread and danger. No  sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, burning
far
away, than he was aware of a change in his burden. As it drew near the great
furnaces  where,  in the deeps of time, it had been shaped  and forged,  the
Ring's power grew, and  it became more fell, untameable  save by some mighty
will. As Sam stood there, even though the Ring was not on him but hanging by
its chain about his neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a
huge distorted shadow of  himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the
walls of  Mordor. He  felt  that he had  from now on  only two  choices:  to
forbear the Ring, though it would torment him; or to claim it, and challenge
the Power that sat in  its dark hold beyond the valley  of  shadows. Already
the Ring tempted him, gnawing at his will and  reason.  Wild fantasies arose
in his mind; and he saw Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a
flaming sword across the darkened land, and armies flocking  to  his call as
he  marched to the  overthrow of  Barad-dyr. And then all the  clouds rolled
away,  and the white sun  shone, and  at his command the  vale of  Gorgoroth
became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit. He had only to
put on the Ring and claim it for his own, and all this could be.
In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to
hold  him firm; but also deep  down in him lived still unconquered his plain
hobbit-sense: he  knew in the core of his heart that he was not large enough
to bear such a burden, even  if such visions were not a mere cheat to betray
him. The one small garden of a free gardener was all his need and due, not a
garden swollen to a realm; his own hands to  use, not the hands of others to
command.
'And  anyway all these notions  are only a trick,' he said  to himself.
'He'd spot me and cow me, before I could so much as shout out. He'd spot me,
pretty  quick, if I put the Ring  on now, in Mordor. Well, all I can say is:
things look  as hopeless  as  a frost in spring.  Just when being  invisible
would be really useful, I can't use the Ring! And if ever I get any further,
it's going to be nothing but a drag and a burden every step. So what's to be
done?'
He was not  really  in any doubt. He knew  that he must go  down to the
gate and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders,  as if to shake
off the shadow and dismiss  the phantoms, he began  slowly  to descend. With
each  step he seemed to  diminish. He had not gone far  before he had shrunk
again to a  very small and  frightened hobbit. He was now  passing under the
very walls of the Tower, and the cries and sounds of fighting could be heard
with his unaided ears. At the moment the  noise seemed to be coming from the
court behind the outer wall.
Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway  into
the red  glow there  came two orcs running. They  did not turn towards  him.
They were  making for the main road; but  even as they ran they stumbled and
fell  to the ground  and lay still.  Sam had seen no  arrows, but he guessed
that the orcs had  been shot down by others on  the battlements or hidden in
the shadow of the gate. He  went on, hugging  the wall on his left. One look
upward had  shown him that there was no hope of  climbing it. The stone-work
rose  thirty  feet, without  a crack  or ledge, to  overhanging courses like
inverted steps. The gate was the only way.
He crept on;  and  as he went  he wondered how many  orcs lived  in the
Tower with Shagrat, and how many Gorbag had, and what they  were
quarrelling
about, if  that was  what was  happening. Shagrat's company had seemed to be
about forty, and  Gorbag's more than twice as large; but of course Shagrat's
patrol  had  only been a part of his  garrison. Almost  certainly  they were
quarrelling  about  Frodo,  and the  spoil.  For  a second  Sam  halted, for
suddenly things seemed clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with  his
eyes. The mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find
it. And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the orders of the
Dark  Tower  were at present Frodo's  only  protection, and if they were set
aside, Frodo might be killed out of hand at any moment.
'Come on, you miserable sluggard!' Sam cried to  himself. `Now for it!'
He drew Sting and ran towards the  open gate. But  just as he was  about  to
pass under its great arch he felt a  shock: as if  he had run into some  web
like Shelob's, only invisible. He could see no obstacle,  but  something too
strong for his will to  overcome barred  the way. He  looked about, and then
within the shadow of the gate he saw the Two Watchers.
They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined
bodies,  and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across the gateway.
The  heads had vulture-faces, and on  their  great knees were  laid clawlike
hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge blocks  of stone, immovable, and
yet they were aware: some dreadful  spirit of evil vigilance  abode in them.
They knew  an  enemy.  Visible or  invisible none  could pass unheeded. They
would forbid his entry, or his escape.
Hardening his  will  Sam thrust forward once again, and  halted  with a
jerk, staggering  as if from a blow  upon his  breast and head. Then greatly
daring, because he could  think  of nothing  else to do, answering  a sudden
thought that came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held
it up.  Its white light quickened swiftly, and  the shadows under  the  dark
arch fled. The monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still, revealed  in all
their hideous shape. For a moment  Sam caught a glitter in  the black stones
of their  eyes, the very malice of which made  him quail; but slowly he felt
their will waver and crumble into fear.
He sprang past them; but even as he  did so, thrusting the  phial  back
into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to
behind  him,  that their vigilance was  renewed. And  from  those evil heads
there came  a high shrill cry that echoed  in the towering walls before him.
Far up above,  like  an answering signal,  a  harsh bell  clanged  a  single
stroke.
'That's done it!'  said Sam. `Now I've rung  the front-door bell! Well,
come   on  somebody!'  he  cried.  `Tell  Captain  Shagrat  that  the  great
Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!'
There  was no answer. Sam  strode forward. Sting glittered  blue in his
