eyes. The mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find
it. And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the orders of the
Dark  Tower  were at present Frodo's  only  protection, and if they were set
aside, Frodo might be killed out of hand at any moment.
'Come on, you miserable sluggard!' Sam cried to  himself. `Now for it!'
He drew Sting and ran towards the  open gate. But  just as he was  about  to
pass under its great arch he felt a  shock: as if  he had run into some  web
like Shelob's, only invisible. He could see no obstacle,  but  something too
strong for his will to  overcome barred  the way. He  looked about, and then
within the shadow of the gate he saw the Two Watchers.
They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined
bodies,  and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across the gateway.
The  heads had vulture-faces, and on  their  great knees were  laid clawlike
hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge blocks  of stone, immovable, and
yet they were aware: some dreadful  spirit of evil vigilance  abode in them.
They knew  an  enemy.  Visible or  invisible none  could pass unheeded. They
would forbid his entry, or his escape.
Hardening his  will  Sam thrust forward once again, and  halted  with a
jerk, staggering  as if from a blow  upon his  breast and head. Then greatly
daring, because he could  think  of nothing  else to do, answering  a sudden
thought that came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held
it up.  Its white light quickened swiftly, and  the shadows under  the  dark
arch fled. The monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still, revealed  in all
their hideous shape. For a moment  Sam caught a glitter in  the black stones
of their  eyes, the very malice of which made  him quail; but slowly he felt
their will waver and crumble into fear.
He sprang past them; but even as he  did so, thrusting the  phial  back
into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to
behind  him,  that their vigilance was  renewed. And  from  those evil heads
there came  a high shrill cry that echoed  in the towering walls before him.
Far up above,  like  an answering signal,  a  harsh bell  clanged  a  single
stroke.
'That's done it!'  said Sam. `Now I've rung  the front-door bell! Well,
come   on  somebody!'  he  cried.  `Tell  Captain  Shagrat  that  the  great
Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!'
There  was no answer. Sam  strode forward. Sting glittered  blue in his
hand. The courtyard lay in  deep shadow, but he could see that  the pavement
was strewn with bodies. Right at his feet were  two  orc-archers with knives
sticking  in their backs. Beyond lay many  more shapes;  some singly as they
had been hewn  down or shot;  others in pairs, still  grappling one another,
dead  in  the very  throes  of stabbing, throttling, biting. The stones were
slippery with dark blood.
Two liveries Sam noticed, one  marked  by the  Red  Eye, the other by a
Moon disfigured with a ghastly  face of death;  but he did not  stop to look
more closely.  Across the court a  great door at the foot of the Tower stood
half  open,  and a red light came through; a large  orc  lay dead  upon  the
threshold. Sam sprang over the body and went in; and then he peered about at
a loss.
A  wide  and  echoing  passage led  back  from  the  door  towards  the
mountain-side. It  was  dimly  lit with torches flaring  in  brackets on the
walls, but its distant end was lost in gloom. Many doors  and openings could
be seen on this  side and  that; but it was empty save for two or three more
bodies sprawling on the  floor. From what he had heard of the captains' talk
Sam knew that, dead  or alive, Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber
high up  in the turret far above; but he  might search for  a day  before he
found the way.
'It'll  be near  the back, I  guess,' Sam  muttered.  `The  whole Tower
climbs backwards-like. And anyway I'd better follow these lights.'
He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more reluctant.
Terror  was beginning to grip him again. There was no sound save the  rap of
his feet, which seemed to  grow to  an echoing noise,  like  the slapping of
great hands upon  the stones. The dead bodies: the emptiness; the dank black
walls  that in the torchlight seemed to drip with blood; the  fear of sudden
death lurking in doorway or  shadow;  and behind all  his mind  the  waiting
watchful malice at the gate: it was almost more than he could  screw himself
to  face. He would have welcomed a fight-with not too many enemies at a time
- rather than this hideous brooding uncertainty. He forced himself to  think
of Frodo,  lying bound or  in pain or dead somewhere in this dreadful place.
He went on.
He had passed  beyond  the torchlight, almost to a great arched door at
the end  of  the passage, the inner side of  the under gate, as  he  rightly
guessed,  when  there  came  from high above a dreadful  choking shriek.  He
stopped short. Then he heard feet coming. Someone was running in great haste
down an echoing stairway overhead.
His  will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at the
chain and  clutched  the Ring. But Sam did  not put  it  on; for even as  he
clasped it to his breast, an orc came clattering down. Leaping out of a dark
opening at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more than six paces from
him  when,  lifting its head, it  saw him;  and  Sam  could hear its gasping
breath and see the glare in its bloodshot eyes. It stopped short aghast. For
what it saw was not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword:
it saw a great silent shape, cloaked in  a grey shadow, looming against  the
wavering light behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very  light of which
was a bitter pain, the other was clutched  at its breast, but held concealed
some nameless menace of power and doom.
For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp  of fear it
turned and fled back as it had come. Never  was  any dog more heartened when
its  enemy turned  tail  than Sam at this unexpected flight. With a shout he
gave chase.
`Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!'  he  cried. 'I'm coming. Just you show
me the way up, or I'll skin you!'
But  the orc  was  in its own haunts,  nimble  and  well-fed. Sam was a
stranger, hungry and weary.  The stairs  were  high  and  steep and winding.
Sam's breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon passed  out  of sight,
and now only faintly  could be  heard the slapping of its feet as it went on
and  up. Every now  and again it gave  a yell, and  the  echo  ran along the
walls. But slowly all sound of it died away.
Sam plodded on.  He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits
had risen a  good  deal.  He thrust  the Ring away  and tightened his  belt.
`Well, well!'  he said. `If only  they all take such a  dislike to me and my
Sting, this  may  turn out  better than  I hoped. And anyway it looks  as if
Shagrat, Gorbag, and company  have done nearly all my job for me. Except for
that little frightened rat, I do believe  there's  nobody left alive  in the
place!'
And with  that  he stopped, brought up  hard, as if he had hit his head
against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struck him like
a  blow. Nobody  left alive!  Whose had  been that  horrible  dying  shriek?
`Frodo, Frodo! Master!' he cried half sobbing. 'If they've killed you,  what
shall I do? Well, I'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.'
