down an echoing stairway overhead.
His  will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at the
chain and  clutched  the Ring. But Sam did  not put  it  on; for even as  he
clasped it to his breast, an orc came clattering down. Leaping out of a dark
opening at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more than six paces from
him  when,  lifting its head, it  saw him;  and  Sam  could hear its gasping
breath and see the glare in its bloodshot eyes. It stopped short aghast. For
what it saw was not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword:
it saw a great silent shape, cloaked in  a grey shadow, looming against  the
wavering light behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very  light of which
was a bitter pain, the other was clutched  at its breast, but held concealed
some nameless menace of power and doom.
For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp  of fear it
turned and fled back as it had come. Never  was  any dog more heartened when
its  enemy turned  tail  than Sam at this unexpected flight. With a shout he
gave chase.
`Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!'  he  cried. 'I'm coming. Just you show
me the way up, or I'll skin you!'
But  the orc  was  in its own haunts,  nimble  and  well-fed. Sam was a
stranger, hungry and weary.  The stairs  were  high  and  steep and winding.
Sam's breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon passed  out  of sight,
and now only faintly  could be  heard the slapping of its feet as it went on
and  up. Every now  and again it gave  a yell, and  the  echo  ran along the
walls. But slowly all sound of it died away.
Sam plodded on.  He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits
had risen a  good  deal.  He thrust  the Ring away  and tightened his  belt.
`Well, well!'  he said. `If only  they all take such a  dislike to me and my
Sting, this  may  turn out  better than  I hoped. And anyway it looks  as if
Shagrat, Gorbag, and company  have done nearly all my job for me. Except for
that little frightened rat, I do believe  there's  nobody left alive  in the
place!'
And with  that  he stopped, brought up  hard, as if he had hit his head
against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struck him like
a  blow. Nobody  left alive!  Whose had  been that  horrible  dying  shriek?
`Frodo, Frodo! Master!' he cried half sobbing. 'If they've killed you,  what
shall I do? Well, I'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.'
Up, up he went. It was dark save  for an occasional torch  flaring at a
turn, or beside some opening  that  led into the higher levels of the Tower.
Sam tried to count the  steps, but  after two hundred he lost his reckoning.
He  was moving quietly  now: for  he thought that he could hear the sound of
voices talking, still  some way above. More than  one rat remained alive, it
seemed.
All  at  once, when he felt that he could pump out no more  breath, nor
force  his knees to bend again, the stair ended. He stood still. The  voices
were  now loud and near. Sam  peered about. He had climbed right to the flat
roof of the third and highest tier of the Tower: an open space, about twenty
yards across, with  a low parapet. There the  stair was covered by  a  small
domed chamber in the midst of the roof, with low doors facing east and west.
Eastward Sam  could  see the plain  of Mordor vast  and  dark below, and the
burning mountain  far away. A  fresh turmoil was surging in its  deep wells,
and the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many
miles the light  of them  lit the tower-top with a red glare.  Westward  the
view was blocked  by the base of the great turret that stood at the  back of
this upper court and reared its  horn high above the crest of the encircling
hills. Light gleamed in a window-slit. Its door was not ten yards from where
Sam stood. It  was open but dark, and from just within its shadow the voices
came.
At first Sam did not listen; he took a pace  out  of the  eastward door
and  looked  about.  At  once he saw  that up  here the  fighting  had  been
fiercest. All the  court was  choked with  dead orcs  or their  severed  and
scattered heads  and limbs. The place stank of death. A snarl  followed by a
blow  and  a  cry  sent him darting back into hiding. An  orc-voice rose  in
anger,  and he knew  it again  at once, harsh, brutal, cold. It was  Shagrat
speaking, Captain of the Tower.
`You won't  go again,  you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot! If
you think  I'm so damaged  that it's safe  to flout me, you're mistaken Come
here, and I'll  squeeze  your  eyes out, like I did to Radbug just now.  And
when some new lads come, I'll deal with you: I'll send you to Shelob.'
`They  won't  come,  not before  you're dead  anyway,'  answered  Snaga
surlily. 'I've told you twice that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, and
none of ours  got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through, but they were shot. I
saw it from a window, I tell you. And they were the last.'
'Then you  must go. I must stay here anyway. But  I'm  hurt.  The Black
Pits take  that filthy  rebel  Gorbag!' Shagrat's  voice trailed off into  a
string of foul  names and curses. `I  gave  him  better  than  I got, but he
knifed me, the dung,  before I throttled him. You must go, or  I'll eat you.
News must  get through to Lugb®rz, or we'll both be for the Black Pits. Yes,
you too. You won't escape by skulking here.'
`I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, `be you captain
or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife,  or I'll  put  an arrow  in your
guts. You won't be a captain  long when They hear about all these goings-on.
I've  fought for the  Tower against those  stinking Morgul-rats,  but a nice
mess you two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.'
'That's enough  from you,'  snarled  Shagrat. `I had my orders. It  was
Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.'
`Well, you put  his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had  more
sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of
these spies was still loose, and you wouldn't  listen. And you  won't listen
now. Gorbag  was right, I tell you. There's  a great fighter  about,  one of
those bloody-handed  Elves, or one of the filthy              tarks .1 He's coming here, I
tell you. You heard the bell.  He's got past the Watchers, and that's                 tark's
work.  He's on the stairs. And until he's off them, I'm not going  down. Not
if you were a Nazgyl, I wouldn't.'
`So  that's it, is it?' yelled Shagrat. 'You'll do this, and you'll not
do  that? And  when he does come, you'll bolt  and leave me? No, you  won't!
I'll put red maggot-holes in your belly first.'
Out of the turret-door the  smaller  orc came flying.  Behind  him came
Shagrat, a large orc with long  arms that,  as  he ran crouching, reached to
the  ground. But one  arm hung  limp and seemed to be  bleeding;  the  other
hugged  a  large black bundle.  In the red  glare  Sam, cowering behind  the
stair-door, caught a glimpse of his evil face as it passed: it was scored as
if  by  rending  claws and  smeared  with blood;  slaver  dripped  from  its
protruding fangs; the mouth snarled like an animal.
As far as Sam could see, Shagrat  hunted  Snaga round  the roof,  until
ducking and eluding  him the  smaller  orc with a yelp darted back  into the
turret  and  disappeared. Then  Shagrat halted. Out of the eastward door Sam
could see  him now  by the parapet, panting,  his  left claw  clenching  and
unclenching feebly. He put  the bundle on the floor and with  his right claw
drew out a long red knife and spat on it.  Going to  the  parapet he  leaned
over, looking down into  the outer court far below.  Twice he shouted but no
