Pits take  that filthy  rebel  Gorbag!' Shagrat's  voice trailed off into  a
string of foul  names and curses. `I  gave  him  better  than  I got, but he
knifed me, the dung,  before I throttled him. You must go, or  I'll eat you.
News must  get through to Lugb®rz, or we'll both be for the Black Pits. Yes,
you too. You won't escape by skulking here.'
`I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, `be you captain
or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife,  or I'll  put  an arrow  in your
guts. You won't be a captain  long when They hear about all these goings-on.
I've  fought for the  Tower against those  stinking Morgul-rats,  but a nice
mess you two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.'
'That's enough  from you,'  snarled  Shagrat. `I had my orders. It  was
Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.'
`Well, you put  his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had  more
sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of
these spies was still loose, and you wouldn't  listen. And you  won't listen
now. Gorbag  was right, I tell you. There's  a great fighter  about,  one of
those bloody-handed  Elves, or one of the filthy              tarks .1 He's coming here, I
tell you. You heard the bell.  He's got past the Watchers, and that's                 tark's
work.  He's on the stairs. And until he's off them, I'm not going  down. Not
if you were a Nazgyl, I wouldn't.'
`So  that's it, is it?' yelled Shagrat. 'You'll do this, and you'll not
do  that? And  when he does come, you'll bolt  and leave me? No, you  won't!
I'll put red maggot-holes in your belly first.'
Out of the turret-door the  smaller  orc came flying.  Behind  him came
Shagrat, a large orc with long  arms that,  as  he ran crouching, reached to
the  ground. But one  arm hung  limp and seemed to be  bleeding;  the  other
hugged  a  large black bundle.  In the red  glare  Sam, cowering behind  the
stair-door, caught a glimpse of his evil face as it passed: it was scored as
if  by  rending  claws and  smeared  with blood;  slaver  dripped  from  its
protruding fangs; the mouth snarled like an animal.
As far as Sam could see, Shagrat  hunted  Snaga round  the roof,  until
ducking and eluding  him the  smaller  orc with a yelp darted back  into the
turret  and  disappeared. Then  Shagrat halted. Out of the eastward door Sam
could see  him now  by the parapet, panting,  his  left claw  clenching  and
unclenching feebly. He put  the bundle on the floor and with  his right claw
drew out a long red knife and spat on it.  Going to  the  parapet he  leaned
over, looking down into  the outer court far below.  Twice he shouted but no
answer came.
Suddenly,  as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back to  the
roof-top, Sam to  his amazement  saw  that one  of the  sprawling bodies was
moving. It  was  crawling. It  put out  a  claw and clutched the  bundle. It
staggered up. In its  other hand it  held a broad-headed spear  with a short
broken haft. It was poised for a stabbing thrust. But at that  very moment a
hiss  escaped  its teeth, a gasp of  pain or hate. Quick as a snake  Shagrat
slipped aside, twisted round, and drove his knife into his enemy's throat.
`Got you, Gorbag!' he cried. 'Not quite dead, eh? Well, I'll finish  my
job now.' He sprang on to the  fallen  body, and stamped and trampled it  in
his  fury, stooping  now and  again to  stab and  slash  it with his  knife.
Satisfied  at last, he threw back  his head and let out a  horrible gurgling
yell of triumph. Then he licked his knife, and put it between his teeth, and
catching up the bundle he came loping towards the near door of the stairs.
Sam had no time  to think. He might have slipped out of the other door,
but  hardly without  being seen;  and he could not have played hide-and-seek
with this  hideous  orc for long. He did what was probably the best thing he
could have  done.  He sprang  out to  meet  Shagrat with a shout. He was  no
longer holding the Ring, but it was there, a hidden power, a  cowing  menace
to the slaves of Mordor; and in his hand was Sting, and its  light smote the
eyes  of  the   orc  like  the  glitter  of  cruel  stars  in  the  terrible
elf-countries, the  dream  of which was a  cold fear to all  his  kind.  And
Shagrat could not  both fight and  keep hold  of his treasure.  He  stopped,
growling, baring his fangs. Then once more, orc-fashion, he leapt aside, and
as Sam  sprang at  him, using the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon, he
thrust it  hard into his  enemy's face. Sam staggered, and before  he  could
recover, Shagrat darted past and down the stairs.
Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far.  Soon the thought of
Frodo returned  to him, and he remembered that the other  orc  had gone back
into the turret. Here was another  dreadful  choice, and he  had  no time to
ponder it. If Shagrat got away, he would soon get help and come back. But if
Sam  pursued him,  the  other orc might  do some horrible deed up there. And
anyway Sam might miss Shagrat or be killed by him. He turned quickly and ran
back up the  stairs. `Wrong again, I expect,' he sighed. `But it's my job to
go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.'
Away below Shagrat went leaping  down the stairs and out over the court
and  through the gate,  bearing his precious burden. If Sam could have  seen
him and known the grief that  his escape would bring, he might have quailed.
But now his mind was set on the last stage of his search. He came cautiously
to the turret-door and stepped inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his
staring  eyes were aware of a dim light at  his right hand. It came  from an
opening that led  to another stairway,  dark  and narrow: it appeared  to go
winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A  torch was
glimmering from somewhere up above.
Softly Sam began to climb. He came  to the guttering torch, fixed above
a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward: one of the
red eyes that he and Frodo  had  seen from down below by the tunnel's mouth.
Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey, dreading at
any  moment to he  attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize  his throat
from behind. He came  next to a window looking east and another torch  above
the door to a passage through the middle  of the turret. The door  was open,
the passage  dark  save for the glimmer of  the torch and the red glare from
outside filtering through  the window-slit.  But here  the stair stopped and
climbed  no further. Sam crept into the passage.  On either side there was a
low door; both were closed and locked. There was no sound at all.
`A dead end,'  muttered Sam; `and after all my climb! This can't be the
top of the tower. But what can I do now?'
He ran back to the lower  storey and tried the door. It would not move.
He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He felt that even
minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped; and he could do nothing.
He  cared  no  longer for Shagrat or Snaga  or any  other orc that  was ever
spawned. He longed  only for his master,  for one  sight of his face  or one
touch of his hand.
At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the
level of the passage-floor and bowed his head into his hands. It  was quiet,
horribly quiet.  The torch,  that was already burning  low  when he arrived,
sputtered and went out; and he felt the darkness cover him like a tide.  And
then softly, to his own  surprise, there at the vain end of his long journey
and his  grief, moved by what thought in his  heart he could  not  tell, Sam
began to sing.
His voice sounded thin and  quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice
of a forlorn and  weary hobbit  that no listening orc could possibly mistake
for the  clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured  old childish tunes out of
the Shire, and snatches of Mr.  Bilbo's  rhymes that came into his mind like
