him and known the grief that  his escape would bring, he might have quailed.
But now his mind was set on the last stage of his search. He came cautiously
to the turret-door and stepped inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his
staring  eyes were aware of a dim light at  his right hand. It came  from an
opening that led  to another stairway,  dark  and narrow: it appeared  to go
winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A  torch was
glimmering from somewhere up above.
Softly Sam began to climb. He came  to the guttering torch, fixed above
a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward: one of the
red eyes that he and Frodo  had  seen from down below by the tunnel's mouth.
Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey, dreading at
any  moment to he  attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize  his throat
from behind. He came  next to a window looking east and another torch  above
the door to a passage through the middle  of the turret. The door  was open,
the passage  dark  save for the glimmer of  the torch and the red glare from
outside filtering through  the window-slit.  But here  the stair stopped and
climbed  no further. Sam crept into the passage.  On either side there was a
low door; both were closed and locked. There was no sound at all.
`A dead end,'  muttered Sam; `and after all my climb! This can't be the
top of the tower. But what can I do now?'
He ran back to the lower  storey and tried the door. It would not move.
He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He felt that even
minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped; and he could do nothing.
He  cared  no  longer for Shagrat or Snaga  or any  other orc that  was ever
spawned. He longed  only for his master,  for one  sight of his face  or one
touch of his hand.
At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the
level of the passage-floor and bowed his head into his hands. It  was quiet,
horribly quiet.  The torch,  that was already burning  low  when he arrived,
sputtered and went out; and he felt the darkness cover him like a tide.  And
then softly, to his own  surprise, there at the vain end of his long journey
and his  grief, moved by what thought in his  heart he could  not  tell, Sam
began to sing.
His voice sounded thin and  quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice
of a forlorn and  weary hobbit  that no listening orc could possibly mistake
for the  clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured  old childish tunes out of
the Shire, and snatches of Mr.  Bilbo's  rhymes that came into his mind like
fleeting glimpses of the country of his home. And then suddenly new strength
rose in him, and his voice rang out, while words of his own came unbidden to
fit the simple tune.
In western lands beneath the Sun
the flowers may rise in Spring,
the trees may bud, the waters run,
the merry finches sing.
Or there maybe 'tis cloudless night
and swaying beeches bear
the Elven-stars as jewels white
amid their branching hair.
Though here at journey's end I lie
in darkness buried deep,
beyond all towers strong and high,
beyond all mountains steep,
above all shadows rides the Sun
and Stars for ever dwell:
I will not say the Day is done,
nor bid the Stars farewell.
`Beyond  all towers strong  and high,'  he began  again,  and  then  he
stopped short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering him. But
now he could  hear nothing. Yes, he  could hear something,  but not a voice.
Footsteps were  approaching.  Now  a  door was being opened  quietly in  the
passage above; the hinges  creaked. Sam crouched  down  listening.  The door
closed with a dull thud; and then a snarling orc-voice rang out.
'Ho la! You up  there, you dunghill rat! Stop your  squeaking,  or I'll
come and deal with you. D'you hear?'
There was no answer.
'All right,' growled Snaga.  `But I'll come and  have a look at you all
the same, and see what you're up to.'
The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now  peering over  the corner of the
passage-threshold, saw a flicker  of light in an open doorway, and  the  dim
shape of an orc  coming out. He seemed to be carrying a ladder. Suddenly the
answer dawned on Sam: the topmost chamber was reached  by a trap-door in
the
roof of the passage. Snaga thrust the ladder  upwards, steadied it, and then
clambered  out  of  sight. Sam heard  a bolt drawn back.  Then he  heard the
hideous voice speaking again.
`You  lie quiet, or  you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live  in
peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, keep  your
trap shut, see? There's a reminder  for you!'  There was  a sound  like  the
crack of a whip.
At that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran,
and went up  the ladder  like a cat. His head came out in the middle of  the
floor of a large  round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof; the westward
window-slit was high and dark. Something  was lying on the floor by the wall
under the window,  but over it a black  orc-shape was straddled. It raised a
whip a second time, but the blow never fell.
With a cry Sam  leapt across  the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled
round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed  its  whip-hand  from its
arm.  Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head-down  at
him.  Sam's  next  blow  went wide,  and  thrown  off  his balance  he  fell
backwards, clutching at  the  orc as it  stumbled over him.  Before he could
scramble up he heard a cry and a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped
on the ladder-head  and  fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more
thought to it. He ran to the figure huddled on the floor. It was Frodo.
He was  naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags: his arm
was  flung up,  shielding his head,  and  across his side there ran an  ugly
whip-weal.
`Frodo! Mr. Frodo,  my dear!'  cried Sam,  tears  almost  blinding him.
`It's Sam, I've come!' He  half  lifted  his  master and hugged  him to  his
breast. Frodo opened his eyes.
`Am  I  still  dreaming?'  he  muttered.  `But  the other  dreams  were
horrible.'
`You're not dreaming at all, Master,'  said  Sam. `It's real. It's  me.
I've come.'
`I can hardly believe it,' said Frodo, clutching him. `There was an orc
with a whip, and then  it  turns into Sam! Then I wasn't  dreaming after all
when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?'
'It was indeed, Mr.  Frodo. I'd given up  hope, almost. I couldn't find
you.
Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he la back  in Sam's
