clambered  out  of  sight. Sam heard  a bolt drawn back.  Then he  heard the
hideous voice speaking again.
`You  lie quiet, or  you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live  in
peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, keep  your
trap shut, see? There's a reminder  for you!'  There was  a sound  like  the
crack of a whip.
At that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran,
and went up  the ladder  like a cat. His head came out in the middle of  the
floor of a large  round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof; the westward
window-slit was high and dark. Something  was lying on the floor by the wall
under the window,  but over it a black  orc-shape was straddled. It raised a
whip a second time, but the blow never fell.
With a cry Sam  leapt across  the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled
round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed  its  whip-hand  from its
arm.  Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head-down  at
him.  Sam's  next  blow  went wide,  and  thrown  off  his balance  he  fell
backwards, clutching at  the  orc as it  stumbled over him.  Before he could
scramble up he heard a cry and a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped
on the ladder-head  and  fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more
thought to it. He ran to the figure huddled on the floor. It was Frodo.
He was  naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags: his arm
was  flung up,  shielding his head,  and  across his side there ran an  ugly
whip-weal.
`Frodo! Mr. Frodo,  my dear!'  cried Sam,  tears  almost  blinding him.
`It's Sam, I've come!' He  half  lifted  his  master and hugged  him to  his
breast. Frodo opened his eyes.
`Am  I  still  dreaming?'  he  muttered.  `But  the other  dreams  were
horrible.'
`You're not dreaming at all, Master,'  said  Sam. `It's real. It's  me.
I've come.'
`I can hardly believe it,' said Frodo, clutching him. `There was an orc
with a whip, and then  it  turns into Sam! Then I wasn't  dreaming after all
when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?'
'It was indeed, Mr.  Frodo. I'd given up  hope, almost. I couldn't find
you.
Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he la back  in Sam's
gentle arms,  closing his eyes, like  a child at rest  when night-fears  are
driven away by some loved voice or hand.
Sam  felt that he  could sit like that in endless happiness; but it was
not allowed. It was not  enough for him to find his master, he  had still to
try and save him. He kissed Frodo's forehead. `Come!  Wake up Mr. Frodo!' he
said, trying to sound as cheerful  as he had when  he drew back the curtains
at Bag End on a summer's morning.
Frodo sighed and sat up. `Where are we? How did I get here?' he asked.
'There's no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo,' said
Sam. `But you're in the top of that tower you and me saw from away  down  by
the tunnel before the orcs got you. How long ago that was I don't know. More
than a day, I guess.'
`Only that?' said  Frodo. `It seems weeks. You  must  tell me all about
it,  if  we get  a  chance. Something  hit me, didn't  it?  And I fell  into
darkness and foul dreams,  and  woke and found that  waking was worse.  Orcs
were all round me. I think they had just been  pouring some horrible burning
drink  down my throat. My head grew clear, but I was  aching and weary. They
stripped me of everything; and then two great brutes came and questioned me,
questioned  me until I thought I should go mad, standing  over me, gloating,
fingering their knives. I'll never forget their claws and eyes.'
`You won't,  if you talk about them, Mr.  Frodo,' said Sam.  'And if we
don't want to see them  again, the sooner we  get going  the better. Can you
walk?'
`Yes,  I can walk,' said Frodo, getting up slowly. 'I am not hurt  Sam.
Only  I feel very tired, and I've a pain here.' He put  his hand to the back
of his neck above his left shoulder. He stood up, and it looked to Sam as if
he was clothed in flame: his naked skin was scarlet in the light of the lamp
above. Twice he paced across the floor.
`That's better!' he said,  his spirits rising a  little. `I didn't dare
to move when I was left alone, or  one of the guards came. Until the yelling
and fighting began. The two big  brutes:  they quarrelled, I think. Over  me
and my  things. I lay  here  terrified. And then all  went deadly quiet, and
that was worse.'
`Yes, they  quarrelled, seemingly,'  said Sam. (There must  have been a
couple  of  hundred of the dirty creatures  in  this place.  A bit of a tall
order for Sam Gamgee, as  you might say. But they've done all the killing of
themselves. That's lucky, but it's too long to make a song about, till we're
out of  here. Now what's to be done? You can't go walking  in the Black Land
in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.'
`They've  taken everything, Sam,' said Frodo. `Everything I had. Do you
understand?      Everything!    '  He cowered on the floor again with bowed head, as
his own words brought home to  him the fullness of the disaster, and despair
overwhelmed him.  'The quest  has failed Sam. Even if we get out of here, we
can't escape. Only  Elves  can escape. Away,  away out  of Middle-earth, far
away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.'
`No,   not  everything, Mr. Frodo. And it  hasn't failed, not yet. I took
it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon.  And I've kept  it safe.  It's round  my
neck  now, and a terrible  burden it is, too.'  Sam fumbled for the Ring and
its chain. `But I suppose you must take it back.' Now it had come to it, Sam
felt reluctant to give up the Ring and burden his master with it again.
`You've  got it?' gasped  Frodo. `You've  got  it  here? Sam, you're  a
marvel!'  Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. `Give it to  me!'  he
cried, standing up, holding out  a trembling hand. `Give it  me at once! You
can't have it!'
'All right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rather startled. 'Here it is!' Slowly
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head.  `But you're in the
land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you'll see the Fiery Mountain
and all. You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to bear.  If
it's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?'
`No, no!'  cried Frodo, snatching the  Ring and chain from Sam's hands.
`No you won't,  you thief!'  He panted, staring at Sam  with eyes wide  with
fear and enmity. Then  suddenly, clasping the Ring in one clenched  fist, he
stood aghast. A mist seemed  to  clear from his eyes, and  he passed a  hand
over  his  aching brow. The hideous vision had  seemed so real to  him, half
bemused as he was still with wound and fear. Sam had changed before his very
eyes  into an orc again, leering and pawing  at his  treasure, a foul little
creature with  greedy  eyes  and  slobbering  mouth. But  now the vision had
passed.  There was Sam kneeling before him, his face wrung with pain,  as if
he had been stabbed in the heart; tears welled from his eyes.
'O Sam!' cried Frodo. `What have I said? What have I done? Forgive  me!
After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the Ring. I wish it had
never, never, been found. But don't mind me, Sam. I must carry the burden to
the end. It can't be altered. You can't come between me and this doom.'
'That's all right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rubbing  his sleeve across his
