out of  here. Now what's to be done? You can't go walking  in the Black Land
in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.'
`They've  taken everything, Sam,' said Frodo. `Everything I had. Do you
understand?      Everything!    '  He cowered on the floor again with bowed head, as
his own words brought home to  him the fullness of the disaster, and despair
overwhelmed him.  'The quest  has failed Sam. Even if we get out of here, we
can't escape. Only  Elves  can escape. Away,  away out  of Middle-earth, far
away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.'
`No,   not  everything, Mr. Frodo. And it  hasn't failed, not yet. I took
it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon.  And I've kept  it safe.  It's round  my
neck  now, and a terrible  burden it is, too.'  Sam fumbled for the Ring and
its chain. `But I suppose you must take it back.' Now it had come to it, Sam
felt reluctant to give up the Ring and burden his master with it again.
`You've  got it?' gasped  Frodo. `You've  got  it  here? Sam, you're  a
marvel!'  Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. `Give it to  me!'  he
cried, standing up, holding out  a trembling hand. `Give it  me at once! You
can't have it!'
'All right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rather startled. 'Here it is!' Slowly
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head.  `But you're in the
land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you'll see the Fiery Mountain
and all. You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to bear.  If
it's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?'
`No, no!'  cried Frodo, snatching the  Ring and chain from Sam's hands.
`No you won't,  you thief!'  He panted, staring at Sam  with eyes wide  with
fear and enmity. Then  suddenly, clasping the Ring in one clenched  fist, he
stood aghast. A mist seemed  to  clear from his eyes, and  he passed a  hand
over  his  aching brow. The hideous vision had  seemed so real to  him, half
bemused as he was still with wound and fear. Sam had changed before his very
eyes  into an orc again, leering and pawing  at his  treasure, a foul little
creature with  greedy  eyes  and  slobbering  mouth. But  now the vision had
passed.  There was Sam kneeling before him, his face wrung with pain,  as if
he had been stabbed in the heart; tears welled from his eyes.
'O Sam!' cried Frodo. `What have I said? What have I done? Forgive  me!
After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the Ring. I wish it had
never, never, been found. But don't mind me, Sam. I must carry the burden to
the end. It can't be altered. You can't come between me and this doom.'
'That's all right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rubbing  his sleeve across his
eyes. `I understand. But I can still help, can't I? I've got to get  you out
of  here. At  once, see! But first you want  some clothes  and gear and then
some food.  The clothes will be the  easiest part. As we're in Mordor, we'd,
best  dress up Mordor-fashion;  and anyway there isn't no choice. It'll have
to  be orc-stuff  for you, Mr.  Frodo,  I'm afraid. And for me too. If we go
together, we'd best match. Now put this round you!'
Sam unclasped his grey cloak and cast it about Frodo's  shoulders. Then
unslinging his pack he laid  it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath.
Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon  its blade. `I was forgetting this, Mr.
Frodo,' he said.  `No, they didn't get everything! You lent me Sting, if you
remember, and the Lady's glass. I've  got them both still. But  lend them to
me a little longer, Mr. Frodo. I must go  and see what  I can find. You stay
here. Walk about a bit and ease your legs. I shan't be long.  I shan't  have
to go far.'
`Take  care,  Sam!'  said Frodo. `And be quick! There may be orcs still
alive, lurking in wait.'
'I've  got to chance  it,' said  Sam. He  stepped to the  trap-door and
slipped down the ladder. In a  minute  his head reappeared. He threw  a long
knife on the floor.
`There's something that might be  useful,' he said. 'He's dead: the one
that  whipped  you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his hurry. Now you draw  up
the ladder, if  you can, Mr. Frodo;  and don't you let it down till you hear
me call the password.        Elbereth     I'll call. What  the Elves say. No orc would
say that.'
Frodo sat  for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one another
through his mind. Then he  got up, drew the grey elven-cloak about him,  and
to keep his mind occupied, began to walk to and fro, prying and peering into
every corner of his prison.
It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least, before
he  heard Sam's voice calling softly from  below:               Elbereth, Elbereth      . Frodo
let  down the light ladder. Up  came Sam, puffing, heaving a great bundle on
his head. He let it fall with a thud.
`Quick now. Mr.  Frodo!' he said. `I've had a  bit of  a search to find
anything  small enough for the likes of us.  We'll have  to make do.  But we
must hurry. I've met nothing alive, and  I've seen nothing but I'm not easy.
I think this place is being watched. I can't explain it, but well: it  feels
to me as  if  one of those foul flying Riders was about, up in the blackness
where he can't be seen.'
He opened  the  bundle. Frodo  looked in  disgust at  the contents, but
there was nothing for it: he had to put the  things on, or go  naked.  There
were  long hairy breeches of some unclean beast-fell,  and a  tunic of dirty
leather. He  drew them on. Over the  tunic  went a coat  of stout ring-mail,
short for  a  full-sized  orc,  too long for  Frodo  and heavy. About it  he
clasped  a belt, at which there hung a  short  sheath holding a broad-bladed
stabbing-sword.  Sam  had brought  several  orc-helmets. One of  them fitted
Frodo well enough, a black  cap with iron rim, and  iron  hoops covered with
leather  upon  which  the  evil  Eye was  painted  in red above the beaklike
nose-guard.
`The Morgul-stuff,  Gorbag's gear,  was  a better fit and better made,'
said Sam;  `but it  wouldn't do,  I  guess, to go  carrying his  tokens into
Mordor,  not  after  this  business here. Well,  there you are, Mr. Frodo. A
perfect little orc, if I may make so bold-at least you would be, if we could
cover your face with a mask,  give you longer arms, and make you bow-legged.
This  will  hide some of the tell-tales.' He put a large  black cloak  round
Frodo's shoulders. `Now you're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.'
'What about you, Sam?' said Frodo. `Aren't we going to match?'
`Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been  thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best  not  leave
any of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it.  And  I can't wear orc-mail
over all my clothes, can I? I'll just have to cover up.'
He knelt  down  and  carefully  folded his elven-cloak. It went  into a
surprisingly small roll. This  he  put into his pack  that lay on the floor.
Standing up, he slung it behind his back,  put an orc-helm on  his head, and
cast another  black cloak about  his  shoulders. `There!' he  said. `Now  we
match, near enough. And now we must be off!'
'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile. 'I
hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or  have you forgotten
about food and drink?'
`Save me,  but so  I had!' said Sam.  He whistled in dismay. 'Bless me,
Mr. Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I don't know
when  drop or  morsel last passed my lips. I'd forgotten it,  trying to find
you.  But let  me  think!  Last time I looked  I'd got about enough of  that
waybread, and of  what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep  me on my legs for a
couple of weeks at a pinch. But if there's a drop left in my bottle, there's
