to me as  if  one of those foul flying Riders was about, up in the blackness
where he can't be seen.'
He opened  the  bundle. Frodo  looked in  disgust at  the contents, but
there was nothing for it: he had to put the  things on, or go  naked.  There
were  long hairy breeches of some unclean beast-fell,  and a  tunic of dirty
leather. He  drew them on. Over the  tunic  went a coat  of stout ring-mail,
short for  a  full-sized  orc,  too long for  Frodo  and heavy. About it  he
clasped  a belt, at which there hung a  short  sheath holding a broad-bladed
stabbing-sword.  Sam  had brought  several  orc-helmets. One of  them fitted
Frodo well enough, a black  cap with iron rim, and  iron  hoops covered with
leather  upon  which  the  evil  Eye was  painted  in red above the beaklike
nose-guard.
`The Morgul-stuff,  Gorbag's gear,  was  a better fit and better made,'
said Sam;  `but it  wouldn't do,  I  guess, to go  carrying his  tokens into
Mordor,  not  after  this  business here. Well,  there you are, Mr. Frodo. A
perfect little orc, if I may make so bold-at least you would be, if we could
cover your face with a mask,  give you longer arms, and make you bow-legged.
This  will  hide some of the tell-tales.' He put a large  black cloak  round
Frodo's shoulders. `Now you're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.'
'What about you, Sam?' said Frodo. `Aren't we going to match?'
`Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been  thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best  not  leave
any of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it.  And  I can't wear orc-mail
over all my clothes, can I? I'll just have to cover up.'
He knelt  down  and  carefully  folded his elven-cloak. It went  into a
surprisingly small roll. This  he  put into his pack  that lay on the floor.
Standing up, he slung it behind his back,  put an orc-helm on  his head, and
cast another  black cloak about  his  shoulders. `There!' he  said. `Now  we
match, near enough. And now we must be off!'
'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile. 'I
hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or  have you forgotten
about food and drink?'
`Save me,  but so  I had!' said Sam.  He whistled in dismay. 'Bless me,
Mr. Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I don't know
when  drop or  morsel last passed my lips. I'd forgotten it,  trying to find
you.  But let  me  think!  Last time I looked  I'd got about enough of  that
waybread, and of  what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep  me on my legs for a
couple of weeks at a pinch. But if there's a drop left in my bottle, there's
no more. That's  not going to be enough for two, nohow. Don't ores eat,  and
don't they drink? Or do they just live on foul air and poison?'
`No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that  bred them can only mock,
it cannot make:  not real new things of its own. I  don't think it gave life
to the ores, it only  ruined them and twisted them; and if they are  to live
at all, they have to live like  other living creatures. Foul waters and foul
meats  they'll  take, if they can get no better, but not poison. They've fed
me, and so I'm better off than you. There must be food and  water  somewhere
in this place.' `But there's no time to look for them,' said Sam.
`Well, things are a bit better than you think,' said Frodo. 'I have had
a bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take everything. I've
found my food-bag among some  rags  on  the  floor.  They've rummaged it, of
course. But I  guess  they disliked  the very look and smell of  the                 lembas   ,
worse than Gollum did. It's scattered about  and some  of it is trampled and
broken,  but I've gathered  it  together. It's not far short of  what you've
got.   But  they've   taken  Faramir's  food,  and  they've  slashed  up  my
water-bottle.'
`Well,  there's no more  to  be said,' said  Sam. `We've got enough  to
start  on.  But the water's going to be a  bad business. But come Mr. Frodo!
Off we go, or a whole lake of it won't do us any good!'
'Not  till you've  had  a mouthful,  Sam,' said Frodo. `I won't  budge.
Here, take this elven-cake, and  drink that last drop in  your  bottle!  The
whole thing is quite hopeless, so it's no good worrying  about  tomorrow. It
probably won't come.'
At last they started. Down the ladder  they climbed, and then Sam  took
it and laid it in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen orc. The
stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare of the Mountain could still be
seen, though it  was dying down  now to  a  sullen red.  They  picked up two
shields to complete their disguise and then went on.
Down  the great stairway they plodded. The  high chamber of the  turret
behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely: they were out in the
open again  now,  and terror ran along  the walls. All might be  dead in the
Tower of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped in fear and evil still.
At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they  halted.
Even  from where they stood they felt the malice  of the Watchers beating on
them, black silent shapes on either side of the gate through which the glare
of Mordor dimly showed. As they threaded their way among the hideous
bodies
of the  ores each step became more  difficult. Before they  even reached the
archway they were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and
weariness to will and limb.
Frodo  had no  strength  for such a  battle. He sank  to the ground. `I
can't go  on, Sam,' he  murmured. `I'm  going  to faint. I don't know what's
come over me.'
`I  do, Mr.  Frodo. Hold up  now! It's  the gate.  There's some devilry
there. But  I got  through,  and  I'm going to  get  out.  It can't be  more
dangerous than before. Now for it!'
Sam drew  out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honour to
his hardihood, and to grace with  splendour  his faithful  brown hobbit-hand
that had done such  deeds, the  phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the
shadowy  court  was  lit with  a  dazzling  radiance  like lightning; but it
remained steady and did not pass.
' Gilthoniel, A  Elbereth!    ' Sam  cried. For, why he  did  not know,  his
thought sprang back suddenly to  the Elves in the Shire,  and the song  that
drove away the Black Rider in the trees.
' Aiya elenion ancalima!      ' cried Frodo once again behind him.
The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping
of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled  forward. Then they  ran.  Through the
gate and past the great seated figures with their glittering eyes. There was
a crack.  The keystone of the  arch  crashed almost on  their heels, and the
wall  above crumbled, and fell in ruin. Only  by a  hair did  they escape. A
bell clanged; and from the Watchers there went up  a high and dreadful wail.
Far  up above in  the darkness it was answered. Out of the  black  sky there
came dropping like a bolt a winged shape, rending the clouds with  a ghastly
shriek.
