We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.
To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,
Through moor and waste we ride in haste,
And whither then we cannot tell.
With foes ahead, behind us dread,
Beneath the sky shall be our bed,
Until at last our toil be passed,
Our journey done, our errand sped.
We must away! We must away!
We ride before the break of day!
'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for tonight at any rate.'
'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before
the break of day?'
'I don't know,' answered  Frodo. 'I fear those  Black Riders, and  I am
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in  a place to which
it is known  I was going. Also Gildor advised me  not to wait. But I  should
very  much like  to see  Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed
when  he heard that Gandalf  had never  appeared. It really  depends  on two
things.  How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how  soon could
we
get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.'
'The answer to the  second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except  for
a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.'
'It seems to have been  a  very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?'
'That all depends on  what you think the Riders would do, if they found
you here,' answered Merry. 'They            could   have reached here  by now, of course,
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the
river-bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them
through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they
would try  to keep them out, I think, at any  rate until  they got a message
through to the Master of the Hall - for they would not like the  look of the
Riders, and would certainly be  frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland
cannot resist a determined attack for  long. And it  is possible that in the
morning even a Black Rider that rode  up  and asked for Mr. Baggins would be
let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back  to  live
at Crickhollow.'
Frodo  sat for  a while in thought. 'I have made  up  my mind,' he said
finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going
by road: it  would be safer  to  wait here than  that.  If  I go through the
North-gate my departure from  Buckland  will  be  known at once, instead  of
being secret for  several days at least,  as it might be. And  what is more,
the Bridge and the  East Road  near the  borders  will certainly be watched,
whether  any Rider gets into  Buckland or not. We don't know  how many there
are; but there are at least  two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is
to go off in a quite unexpected direction.'
'But that  can only mean going  into  the  Old  Forest!'  said Fredegar
horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as
Black Riders.'
'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very  desperate, but I believe Frodo
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed  at once.
With luck we might gel a considerable start.'
'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No
one ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.'
'Oh yes they  do!'  said  Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in  - occasionally
when the fit takes  them. We have  a  private entrance. Frodo  went in once,
long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.'
'Well, do  as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of  the
Old  Forest  than of anything I  know about:  the  stories  about  it  are a
nightmare; but  my  vote hardly counts,  as I am  not going on the  journey.
Still, I am very glad  someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what
you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.'
Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire,
nor to see what lay  outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from
Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine
Bridge.  His task, according to the original plans  of the conspirators, was
to stay  behind and deal with inquisitive folk,  and  to keep up as long  as
possible the  pretence that Mr. Baggins  was still living at Crickhollow. He
had even brought along some old clothes of  Frodo's to help  him  in playing
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove.
'Excellent!' said Frodo,  when he understood the  plan. 'We  could  not
have  left  any  message behind for Gandalf otherwise.  I don't know whether
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk
a written message, in case they got in and  searched the house. But if Fatty
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we
have gone, that  decides me. I am going  into  the Old  Forest  first  thing
tomorrow.'
'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our
job than Fatty's - waiting here till Black Riders come.'
'You wait till you are well inside  the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.'
'It's no  good arguing about it any more,' said Merry.  'We have  still
got  to tidy up and put the finishing touches to  the packing, before we get
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.'
When at last he  had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for  some  time.
His  legs ached. He. was  glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually
he fell into a  vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking  out of a high
window over  a dark  sea of tangled trees.  Down below among the roots there
was the sound of creatures  crawling and snuffling.  He felt sure they would
smell him out sooner or later.
Then  he heard a noise in the distance.  At first he thought  it  was a
great wind  coming over the leaves of the forest. Then  he knew  that it was
not leaves, but the sound of the  Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in
waking life, though it  had often  troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he
was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on  a dark heath,
and there was a strange salt smell in  the air. Looking up he saw before him
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle  up the ridge
towards the  tower:  but  suddenly a light came in  the sky, and there was a
noise of thunder.
