of Mordor dimly showed. As they threaded their way among the hideous
bodies
of the  ores each step became more  difficult. Before they  even reached the
archway they were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and
weariness to will and limb.
Frodo  had no  strength  for such a  battle. He sank  to the ground. `I
can't go  on, Sam,' he  murmured. `I'm  going  to faint. I don't know what's
come over me.'
`I  do, Mr.  Frodo. Hold up  now! It's  the gate.  There's some devilry
there. But  I got  through,  and  I'm going to  get  out.  It can't be  more
dangerous than before. Now for it!'
Sam drew  out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honour to
his hardihood, and to grace with  splendour  his faithful  brown hobbit-hand
that had done such  deeds, the  phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the
shadowy  court  was  lit with  a  dazzling  radiance  like lightning; but it
remained steady and did not pass.
' Gilthoniel, A  Elbereth!    ' Sam  cried. For, why he  did  not know,  his
thought sprang back suddenly to  the Elves in the Shire,  and the song  that
drove away the Black Rider in the trees.
' Aiya elenion ancalima!      ' cried Frodo once again behind him.
The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping
of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled  forward. Then they  ran.  Through the
gate and past the great seated figures with their glittering eyes. There was
a crack.  The keystone of the  arch  crashed almost on  their heels, and the
wall  above crumbled, and fell in ruin. Only  by a  hair did  they escape. A
bell clanged; and from the Watchers there went up  a high and dreadful wail.
Far  up above in  the darkness it was answered. Out of the  black  sky there
came dropping like a bolt a winged shape, rending the clouds with  a ghastly
shriek.
Chapter 2. The Land of Shadow
Sam had just wits enough left to thrust the phial back into his breast.
'Run, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'No, not that way! There's a sheer drop over the
wall. Follow me!'
Down the  road from the  gate they  fled. In fifty paces, with a  swift
bend  round  a jutting bastion  of the cliff, it took them out of sight from
the Tower.  They had escaped for the moment. Cowering back  against the rock
they drew breath, and then they clutched at their  hearts.  Perching  now on
the wall  beside the ruined  gate the Nazgyl sent out its  deadly cries. All
the cliffs echoed.
In terror they  stumbled  on. Soon the road bent sharply eastward again
and exposed them  for  a dreadful  moment  to view from  the Tower. As  they
flitted  across they  glanced  back  and saw the  great black shape upon the
battlement; then they plunged down between high rock-walls in a cutting that
fell steeply to join  the  Morgul-road. They came to  the way-meeting. There
was still  no sign of orcs, nor  of  an answer to the cry of the Nazgyl; but
they  knew that the silence would not last  long. At any moment now the hunt
would begin.
'This won't do, Sam,' said Frodo. 'If we were real orcs, we ought to be
dashing back  to the  Tower, not running away. The  first enemy we meet will
know us. We must get off this road somehow.'
'But we can't,' said Sam, 'not without wings.'
The eastern faces of the Ephel D®ath  were  sheer, falling in cliff and
precipice to the black trough that lay between  them  and the inner ridge. A
short way beyond the  way-meeting,  after another  steep  incline,  a flying
bridge  of stone  leapt over the chasm  and  bore  the road  across into the
tumbled slopes and glens of the Morgai. With a desperate spurt Frodo and Sam
dashed along the bridge;  but  they had  hardly reached its further end when
they  heard  the hue and cry begin. Away  behind them, now high above on the
mountain-side, loomed  the  Tower of Cirith Ungol, its stones glowing dully.
Suddenly its harsh bell clanged  again, and  then broke  into  a  shattering
peal.  Horns sounded.  And now  from beyond  the  bridge-end came
answering
cries. Down in the dark trough,  cut off from the dying  glare of  Orodruin,
Frodo  and  Sam  could not see ahead, but  already  they heard the  tramp of
iron-shod feet, and upon the road there rang the swift clatter of hoofs.
'Quick, Sam!  Over we  go!' cried Frodo. They scrambled  on to  the low
parapet of the  bridge. Fortunately there  was no  longer any dreadful  drop
into the  gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen almost to the
level of the road;  but it was too dark for them to  guess  the depth of the
fall.
'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Good-bye!'
He let go. Frodo followed. And even as they fell they heard the rush of
horsemen sweeping over  the bridge  and  the rattle  of orc-feet  running up
behind. But Sam would have laughed, if he had dared. Half fearing a breaking
plunge down on to unseen rocks the hobbits landed, in a drop of no more than
a dozen feet, with a thud  and  a crunch  into the last  thing that they had
expected: a tangle of thorny bushes.  There Sam  lay still, softly sucking a
scratched hand.
When  the sound of  hoof  and foot  had passed  he ventured a  whisper.
'Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn't know as anything grew in Mordor! But if I
had a'known, this is just what I'd have  looked  for. These thorns must be a
foot long by the feel of them; they've stuck through everything I've got on.
Wish I'd a'put that mail-shirt on!'
'Orc-mail  doesn't keep  these thorns out,'  said Frodo.  'Not  even  a
leather jerkin is any good.'
They had a  struggle  to get out of the thicket. The thorns  and briars
were as tough as wire and as  clinging as  claws. Their cloaks were rent and
tattered before they broke free at last.
'Now down we  go, Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'Down into  the  valley quick,
and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.'
Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the glooms of
Mordor the Sun  was climbing over the eastern  rim of Middle-earth; but here
all was still dark as night. The Mountain smouldered and its fires went out.
The glare  faded from the cliffs.  The easterly wind that  had  been blowing
ever since  they  left  Ithilien now seemed dead.  Slowly and painfully they
clambered down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and
dead
wood in the blind shadows, down and down until they could go no further.
At  length they stopped, and sat  side  by  side, their backs against a
boulder. Both were sweating.  'If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of
