Frodo  and  Sam  could not see ahead, but  already  they heard the  tramp of
iron-shod feet, and upon the road there rang the swift clatter of hoofs.
'Quick, Sam!  Over we  go!' cried Frodo. They scrambled  on to  the low
parapet of the  bridge. Fortunately there  was no  longer any dreadful  drop
into the  gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen almost to the
level of the road;  but it was too dark for them to  guess  the depth of the
fall.
'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Good-bye!'
He let go. Frodo followed. And even as they fell they heard the rush of
horsemen sweeping over  the bridge  and  the rattle  of orc-feet  running up
behind. But Sam would have laughed, if he had dared. Half fearing a breaking
plunge down on to unseen rocks the hobbits landed, in a drop of no more than
a dozen feet, with a thud  and  a crunch  into the last  thing that they had
expected: a tangle of thorny bushes.  There Sam  lay still, softly sucking a
scratched hand.
When  the sound of  hoof  and foot  had passed  he ventured a  whisper.
'Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn't know as anything grew in Mordor! But if I
had a'known, this is just what I'd have  looked  for. These thorns must be a
foot long by the feel of them; they've stuck through everything I've got on.
Wish I'd a'put that mail-shirt on!'
'Orc-mail  doesn't keep  these thorns out,'  said Frodo.  'Not  even  a
leather jerkin is any good.'
They had a  struggle  to get out of the thicket. The thorns  and briars
were as tough as wire and as  clinging as  claws. Their cloaks were rent and
tattered before they broke free at last.
'Now down we  go, Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'Down into  the  valley quick,
and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.'
Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the glooms of
Mordor the Sun  was climbing over the eastern  rim of Middle-earth; but here
all was still dark as night. The Mountain smouldered and its fires went out.
The glare  faded from the cliffs.  The easterly wind that  had  been blowing
ever since  they  left  Ithilien now seemed dead.  Slowly and painfully they
clambered down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and
dead
wood in the blind shadows, down and down until they could go no further.
At  length they stopped, and sat  side  by  side, their backs against a
boulder. Both were sweating.  'If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of
water, I'd shake his hand,' said Sam.
'Don't say such things!' said Frodo. 'It only makes it  worse.' Then he
stretched himself out, dizzy and weary, and he spoke no more for a while. At
last with a struggle he got up again. To his amazement he found that Sam was
asleep.  'Wake  up,  Sam!'  he  said. 'Come on! It's time  we  made  another
effort.'
Sam scrambled  to  his feet.  'Well I  never!' he  said.  'I  must have
dropped off. It's a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep, and my
eyes just closed down on their own.'
Frodo now led the way, northward as near as he could  guess,  among the
stones  and boulders lying thick at  the bottom of  the  great  ravine.  But
presently he stopped again.
'It's no good, Sam,' he said. 'I  can't  manage  it. This mail-shirt, I
mean. Not in my present state. Even my mithril-coat seemed heavy when I  was
tired. This is far heavier. And what's the use of it? We shan't win  through
by fighting.'
'But we may  have some to do,' said  Sam. 'And there's knives and stray
arrows. That  Gollum isn't dead, for one thing. I don't like to think of you
with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark.'
'Look here, Sam dear lad,' said Frodo: 'I am tired, weary,  I haven't a
hope left.  But I have to go on trying to get  to the Mountain, as long as I
can move. The  Ring is enough. This extra  weight is killing me. It must go.
But don't think  I'm ungrateful. I hate  to think of the foul work  you must
have had among the bodies to find it for me.'
'Don't talk about it, Mr. Frodo. Bless you! I'd  carry you  on my back,
if I could. Let it go then!'
Frodo laid aside his cloak and took off the orc-mail and flung it away.
He shivered a little. 'What I really need is something warm,' he said. 'It's
gone cold, or else I've caught a chill.'
'You can have my cloak,  Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. He unslung his  pack and
took out the elven-cloak. 'How's  this, Mr.  Frodo?' he said. 'You wrap that
orc-rag close round you, and  put the belt outside it. Then this can go over
all.  It  don't  look quite orc-fashion, but it'll  keep you  warmer; and  I
daresay it'll  keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by
the Lady.'
Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch. 'That's better!' he said.
'I feel much lighter. I  can go  on now.  But this  blind dark  seems to  be
getting into my  heart.  As I lay in  prison,  Sam. I tried to  remember the
Brandywine, and  Woody  End,  and  The  Water  running  through  the mill at
Hobbiton. But I can't see them now.'
'There  now, Mr.  Frodo, it's you  that's  talking of water this time!'
said Sam. 'If only the  Lady could see us or hear us, I'd say to  her: (Your
Ladyship,  all  we  want is  light  and  water:  just clean water and  plain
daylight, better than any jewels,  begging your pardon.( But it's a long way
to Lurien.' Sam sighed and waved his  hand towards the heights of the  Ephel
D®ath, now only to be guessed as a deeper blackness against the black sky.
They  started  off again. They  had not gone  far  when  Frodo  paused.
'There's a Black Rider over us,' he said. 'I can feel it. We had better keep
still for a while.'
Crouched under  a great  boulder they sat facing back  westward and did
not speak  for some  time. Then  Frodo  breathed  a  sigh of  relief.  'It's
passed,' he said.  They  stood up, and then they both stared in wonder. Away
to their left, southward, against a sky that was turning grey, the peaks and
high  ridges  of  the great range began  to appear  dark and black,  visible
shapes. Light  was growing behind them.  Slowly it crept towards the  North.
There  was battle far above  in  the high spaces of the  air. The  billowing
clouds of Mordor were being driven back, their edges tattering as a wind out
of  the living world came up and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark
land of their home. Under  the lifting skirts of the dreary canopy dim light
leaked into Mordor like pale morning through the grimed window of a prison.
'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!'  said  Sam. 'Look  at it!  The wind's changed.
Something's happening. He's not having it all  his own way.  His darkness is
breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!'
It was  the morning  of the fifteenth of  March,  and over the  Vale of
Anduin the Sun was rising  above the eastern shadow, and the south-west wind
was blowing. Thjoden lay dying on the Pelennor Fields.
As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all along the
line  of the Ephel D®ath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a great speed
out of  the West, at first only a  black speck against  the glimmering strip
above the mountain-tops, but  growing, until it plunged like a bolt into the
dark canopy and passed high above them. As it went it sent out a long shrill
cry, the voice of a Nazgyl; but this cry no longer held any terror for them:
it was a cry of woe and dismay, ill tidings for the Dark Tower. The Lord  of
