getting into my  heart.  As I lay in  prison,  Sam. I tried to  remember the
Brandywine, and  Woody  End,  and  The  Water  running  through  the mill at
Hobbiton. But I can't see them now.'
'There  now, Mr.  Frodo, it's you  that's  talking of water this time!'
said Sam. 'If only the  Lady could see us or hear us, I'd say to  her: (Your
Ladyship,  all  we  want is  light  and  water:  just clean water and  plain
daylight, better than any jewels,  begging your pardon.( But it's a long way
to Lurien.' Sam sighed and waved his  hand towards the heights of the  Ephel
D®ath, now only to be guessed as a deeper blackness against the black sky.
They  started  off again. They  had not gone  far  when  Frodo  paused.
'There's a Black Rider over us,' he said. 'I can feel it. We had better keep
still for a while.'
Crouched under  a great  boulder they sat facing back  westward and did
not speak  for some  time. Then  Frodo  breathed  a  sigh of  relief.  'It's
passed,' he said.  They  stood up, and then they both stared in wonder. Away
to their left, southward, against a sky that was turning grey, the peaks and
high  ridges  of  the great range began  to appear  dark and black,  visible
shapes. Light  was growing behind them.  Slowly it crept towards the  North.
There  was battle far above  in  the high spaces of the  air. The  billowing
clouds of Mordor were being driven back, their edges tattering as a wind out
of  the living world came up and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark
land of their home. Under  the lifting skirts of the dreary canopy dim light
leaked into Mordor like pale morning through the grimed window of a prison.
'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!'  said  Sam. 'Look  at it!  The wind's changed.
Something's happening. He's not having it all  his own way.  His darkness is
breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!'
It was  the morning  of the fifteenth of  March,  and over the  Vale of
Anduin the Sun was rising  above the eastern shadow, and the south-west wind
was blowing. Thjoden lay dying on the Pelennor Fields.
As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all along the
line  of the Ephel D®ath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a great speed
out of  the West, at first only a  black speck against  the glimmering strip
above the mountain-tops, but  growing, until it plunged like a bolt into the
dark canopy and passed high above them. As it went it sent out a long shrill
cry, the voice of a Nazgyl; but this cry no longer held any terror for them:
it was a cry of woe and dismay, ill tidings for the Dark Tower. The Lord  of
the Ring-wraiths had met his doom.
'What did I tell you? Something's happening!'  cried Sam.'  (The  war's
going well,(  said Shagrat; but Gorbag he  wasn't so sure. And  he was right
there too. Things are looking up, Mr. Frodo. Haven't you got some hope now?'
'Well  no,  not much,  Sam,'  Frodo  sighed. 'That's  away  beyond  the
mountains. We're going east not west. And I'm  so tired. And the Ring  is so
heavy, Sam.  And  I begin to  see it in my mind  all the time, like a  great
wheel of fire.'
Sam's  quick  spirits  sank again  at  once. He  looked  at  his master
anxiously, and he took his hand.  'Come, Mr.  Frodo!' he said. 'I've got one
thing  I  wanted: a bit of light. Enough  to help  us, and yet I guess  it's
dangerous too. Try a bit further,  and then we'll lie close and have a rest.
But take a morsel to eat now, a bit of the Elves' food; it may hearten you.'
Sharing  a  wafer of      lembas   , and  munching it as  best they could with
their parched  mouths. Frodo and Sam  plodded on. The light,  though no more
than a grey  dusk, was now enough for them to see that they were deep in the
valley  between  the mountains. It sloped  up gently  northward,  and at its
bottom  went the bed  of a now dry  and  withered stream.  Beyond  its stony
course  they saw a beaten  path that  wound  its way under the  feet of  the
westward cliffs. Had they known,  they could have reached it quicker, for it
was a track that  left the main Morgul-road at the  western  bridge-end  and
went down  by  a long stair cut in the rock to the valley's  bottom.  It was
used  by  patrols  or  by  messengers going  swiftly  to  lesser  posts  and
strongholds north-away, between Cirith Ungol and the narrows of  Isenmouthe,
the iron jaws of Carach Angren.
It was  perilous for the hobbits to use  such  a path,  but they needed
speed, and  Frodo felt that he could not face the  toil of  scrambling among
the boulders or in the trackless glens  of  the Morgai. And  he  judged that
northward was, maybe, the way that their hunters would least expect them  to
take.  The  road east  to the plain, or the pass back westward,  those  they
would first search most thoroughly. Only when he was well north of the Tower
did he mean to turn and seek for some way to take him east, east on the last
desperate  stage of his journey. So now  they crossed the stony bed and took
to  the orc-path, and  for some time  they  marched along  it. The cliffs at
their left  were overhung, and they could  not be seen  from above; but  the
path made many bends, and at each  bend they  gripped their  sword-hilts and
went forward cautiously.
The  light grew no stronger,  for  Orodruin was still belching forth  a
great  fume that, beaten  upwards by  the  opposing airs, mounted higher and
higher,  until it  reached  a  region  above  the  wind  and  spread  in  an
immeasurable roof, whose central pillar rose out of the shadows beyond their
view. They had  trudged for more than an hour  when they heard a sound  that
brought them to a halt. Unbelievable, but unmistakable. Water trickling. Out
of a gully on the left, so sharp  and narrow  that it looked as if the black
cliff had been cloven by some  huge  axe, water came dripping down: the last
remains, maybe, of some sweet rain gathered  from sunlit seas, but ill-fated
to  fall at last upon the walls of  the Black Land and wander fruitless down
into  the dust. Here it came out of  the rock in a little falling streamlet,
and  flowed  across the path, and turning south  ran away swiftly to be lost
among the dead stones.
Sam sprang towards it. 'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!'
he cried. 'Light  and now  water!' Then he stopped. 'Let me  drink first Mr.
Frodo,' he said.
'All right, but there's room enough for two.'
'I didn't  mean  that,'  said  Sam.  'I  mean:  if it's  poisonous,  or
something  that will  show  its  badness quick, well,  better me  than  you,
master, if you understand me.'
'I do. But I think we'll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing.
Still, be careful now, if it's very cold!'
The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste, at once
bitter and  oily, or  so they would have said at home. Here it seemed beyond
all  praise, and beyond fear  or  prudence. They  drank their  fill, and Sam
replenished his water-bottle. After that Frodo felt easier, and they went on
for several miles, until the broadening of the road and  the beginnings of a
rough wall along its edge warned them that they were drawing near to another
orc-hold.
'This  is  where  we  turn aside, Sam,' said  Frodo. 'And we  must turn
east.'  He  sighed as he looked at  the gloomy ridges across the  valley. 'I
have just about  enough strength left to find  some hole  away up there. And
then I must rest a little.'
The river-bed  was now some way  below the path. They scrambled down to
it,  and began to cross  it. To their surprise they came upon dark pools fed
by  threads  of water trickling down from some source  higher up the valley.
