The  light grew no stronger,  for  Orodruin was still belching forth  a
great  fume that, beaten  upwards by  the  opposing airs, mounted higher and
higher,  until it  reached  a  region  above  the  wind  and  spread  in  an
immeasurable roof, whose central pillar rose out of the shadows beyond their
view. They had  trudged for more than an hour  when they heard a sound  that
brought them to a halt. Unbelievable, but unmistakable. Water trickling. Out
of a gully on the left, so sharp  and narrow  that it looked as if the black
cliff had been cloven by some  huge  axe, water came dripping down: the last
remains, maybe, of some sweet rain gathered  from sunlit seas, but ill-fated
to  fall at last upon the walls of  the Black Land and wander fruitless down
into  the dust. Here it came out of  the rock in a little falling streamlet,
and  flowed  across the path, and turning south  ran away swiftly to be lost
among the dead stones.
Sam sprang towards it. 'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!'
he cried. 'Light  and now  water!' Then he stopped. 'Let me  drink first Mr.
Frodo,' he said.
'All right, but there's room enough for two.'
'I didn't  mean  that,'  said  Sam.  'I  mean:  if it's  poisonous,  or
something  that will  show  its  badness quick, well,  better me  than  you,
master, if you understand me.'
'I do. But I think we'll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing.
Still, be careful now, if it's very cold!'
The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste, at once
bitter and  oily, or  so they would have said at home. Here it seemed beyond
all  praise, and beyond fear  or  prudence. They  drank their  fill, and Sam
replenished his water-bottle. After that Frodo felt easier, and they went on
for several miles, until the broadening of the road and  the beginnings of a
rough wall along its edge warned them that they were drawing near to another
orc-hold.
'This  is  where  we  turn aside, Sam,' said  Frodo. 'And we  must turn
east.'  He  sighed as he looked at  the gloomy ridges across the  valley. 'I
have just about  enough strength left to find  some hole  away up there. And
then I must rest a little.'
The river-bed  was now some way  below the path. They scrambled down to
it,  and began to cross  it. To their surprise they came upon dark pools fed
by  threads  of water trickling down from some source  higher up the valley.
Upon its  outer marges under the westward mountains Mordor was a dying
land,
but it was not yet dead. And here things still grew, harsh, twisted, bitter,
struggling  for life. In  the glens of the Morgai on the other  side  of the
valley low scrubby trees lurked and clung, coarse grey grass-tussocks fought
with the stones,  and withered mosses crawled on them; and  everywhere great
writhing, tangled brambles sprawled. Some  had  long stabbing  thorns,  some
hooked barbs that rent like knives. The sullen shrivelled leaves of  a  past
year  hung on  them,  grating  and  rattling  in  the  sad airs,  but  their
maggot-ridden buds were  only  just  opening. Flies,  dun or grey, or black,
marked like ores with a red  eye-shaped blotch, buzzed and stung;  and above
the briar-thickets clouds of hungry midges danced and reeled.
'Orc-gear's no  good,' said Sam, waving his  arms. 'I  wish I'd got  an
orc's hide!'
At  last Frodo  could  go  no further.  They had  climbed  up  a narrow
shelving ravine, but  they still had a long way to go before they could even
come in sight of the last craggy ridge. 'I must rest  now, Sam, and sleep if
I can.' said Frodo.  He looked  about, but there seemed  nowhere even for an
animal to crawl into  in this  dismal  country.  At length,  tired out, they
slunk  under a  curtain  of brambles that hung  down  like a  mat over a low
rock-face.
There  they sat and  made such a meal as they could. Keeping  back  the
precious     lembas    for the evil days ahead, they ate the half of what remained
in Sam's bag of Faramir's provision: some  dried fruit, and a small  slip of
cured meat; and they sipped some water. They  had drunk again from the pools
in the valley, but they were very, thirsty again. There was a bitter tang in
the air of Mordor  that dried the mouth. When Sam thought of water  even his
hopeful spirit quailed.  Beyond  the Morgai there was the dreadful plain  of
Gorgoroth to cross.
'Now  you go to  sleep first, Mr. Frodo,' he said.  'It's getting  dark
again. I reckon this day is nearly over.'
Frodo sighed and was  asleep almost before  the words were  spoken. Sam
struggled with his own weariness, and he took Frodo's hand; and there he sat
silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself awake, he crawled
from  the hiding-place and looked out. The land seemed full of creaking  and
cracking and sly noises, but there was  no  sound of  voice or  of foot. Far
above the  Ephel D®ath  in the West  the night-sky  was still dim and  pale.
There,  peeping among the cloud-wrack  above  a  dark  tor high  up  in  the
mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for  a while. The beauty of it smote
his heart, as he looked  up  out  of the forsaken land, and hope returned to
him. For like  a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced  him that in the
end the Shadow was  only a small and passing thing: there was light and high
beauty for ever beyond  its reach. His song in  the Tower had been  defiance
rather  than hope;  for  then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment,
his own fate,  and even his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled  back
into the  brambles and  laid  himself by Frodo's side,  and putting away all
fear he cast himself into a deep untroubled sleep.
They woke  together, hand in  hand.  Sam was  almost fresh,  ready  for
another day; but Frodo sighed.  His sleep had been uneasy, full of dreams of
fire, and  waking  brought  him no comfort.  Still  his sleep  had not  been
without  all healing virtue: he was stronger, more able  to  bear his burden
one stage further. They did not know the time, nor how long  they had slept;
but after a morsel of food and a sip of water  they went  on up  the ravine,
until it ended in a sharp slope of screes and sliding stones. There the last
living things gave up their struggle; the tops of the Morgai were grassless,
bare, jagged, barren as a slate.
After much wandering and search they found a way that they could climb,
and with a last hundred feet  of clawing scramble they were up. They came to
a cleft between two dark crags, and passing through found  themselves on the
very edge of the last  fence of Mordor. Below them, at the  bottom of a fall
of  some fifteen hundred feet,  lay  the inner plain stretching away into  a
formless gloom beyond their sight. The wind  of the world blew now from  the
West, and  the great clouds  were lifted  high,  floating away eastward; but
still only a grey light came to the dreary fields of Gorgoroth. There smokes
trailed on the ground and lurked in hollows, and fumes  leaked from fissures
in the earth.
Still far away, forty  miles  at least,  they  saw Mount Doom, its feet
founded in  ashen ruin, its huge cone rising  to  a great height,  where its
reeking  head was swathed in cloud. Its fires were now  dimmed, and it stood
in smouldering slumber, as threatening and  dangerous as a  sleeping  beast.
Behind it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as a thunder-cloud, the veils of
Barad-dyr  that was  reared far  way upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains
thrust down from the North. The Dark Power was deep in  thought, and the Eye
turned inward, pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a  bright sword, and a
