There,  peeping among the cloud-wrack  above  a  dark  tor high  up  in  the
mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for  a while. The beauty of it smote
his heart, as he looked  up  out  of the forsaken land, and hope returned to
him. For like  a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced  him that in the
end the Shadow was  only a small and passing thing: there was light and high
beauty for ever beyond  its reach. His song in  the Tower had been  defiance
rather  than hope;  for  then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment,
his own fate,  and even his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled  back
into the  brambles and  laid  himself by Frodo's side,  and putting away all
fear he cast himself into a deep untroubled sleep.
They woke  together, hand in  hand.  Sam was  almost fresh,  ready  for
another day; but Frodo sighed.  His sleep had been uneasy, full of dreams of
fire, and  waking  brought  him no comfort.  Still  his sleep  had not  been
without  all healing virtue: he was stronger, more able  to  bear his burden
one stage further. They did not know the time, nor how long  they had slept;
but after a morsel of food and a sip of water  they went  on up  the ravine,
until it ended in a sharp slope of screes and sliding stones. There the last
living things gave up their struggle; the tops of the Morgai were grassless,
bare, jagged, barren as a slate.
After much wandering and search they found a way that they could climb,
and with a last hundred feet  of clawing scramble they were up. They came to
a cleft between two dark crags, and passing through found  themselves on the
very edge of the last  fence of Mordor. Below them, at the  bottom of a fall
of  some fifteen hundred feet,  lay  the inner plain stretching away into  a
formless gloom beyond their sight. The wind  of the world blew now from  the
West, and  the great clouds  were lifted  high,  floating away eastward; but
still only a grey light came to the dreary fields of Gorgoroth. There smokes
trailed on the ground and lurked in hollows, and fumes  leaked from fissures
in the earth.
Still far away, forty  miles  at least,  they  saw Mount Doom, its feet
founded in  ashen ruin, its huge cone rising  to  a great height,  where its
reeking  head was swathed in cloud. Its fires were now  dimmed, and it stood
in smouldering slumber, as threatening and  dangerous as a  sleeping  beast.
Behind it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as a thunder-cloud, the veils of
Barad-dyr  that was  reared far  way upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains
thrust down from the North. The Dark Power was deep in  thought, and the Eye
turned inward, pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a  bright sword, and a
stern  and kingly face  it  saw, and for  a while it gave  little thought to
other things;  and  all its great  stronghold, gate on  gate,  and tower  on
tower, was wrapped in a brooding gloom.
Frodo and Sam gazed out in  mingled loathing and wonder on this hateful
land. Between them and  the smoking mountain, and about  it north and south,
all seemed ruinous and dead, a  desert burned  and choked. They wondered
how
the Lord of  this realm maintained  and  fed his  slaves and his armies. Yet
armies he had.  As far as their  eyes could reach, along the  skirts  of the
Morgai and away southward,  there were camps, some  of tents,  some  ordered
like small towns. One of the largest of these was right below them. Barely a
mile  out into  the  plain it clustered like some huge nest of insects, with
straight dreary streets of huts  and  long low drab buildings. About it  the
ground  was  busy  with folk  going  to and  fro; a  wide  road  ran from it
south-east to join the  Morgul-way, and along it  many  lines of small black
shapes were hurrying.
'I don't like the look of things at all,' said Sam. 'Pretty hopeless, I
call it - saving that where there's such  a lot of folk  there must be wells
or water, not to mention  food. And these  are Men not Orcs,  or my eyes are
all wrong.'
Neither  he nor Frodo knew  anything of  the great slave-worked  fields
away south  in this wide realm, beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark
sad waters  of Lake  N®rnen; nor of  the great roads that ran away  east and
south to tributary lands, from which the soldiers of the Tower  brought long
waggon-trains of goods  and booty and fresh  slaves. Here  in  the northward
regions were the mines and forges, and the musterings of  long-planned  war;
and  here the  Dark  Power, moving its armies like pieces on the  board, was
gathering them together. Its first moves, the first feelers of its strength,
had been  checked  upon  its western  line, southward and northward. For the
moment  it withdrew  them,  and  brought  up new forces, massing  them about
Cirith Gorgor for an avenging stroke. And if it had also been its purpose to
defend the Mountain against all approach, it could scarcely have done more.
'Well!' Sam went on. 'Whatever they have to eat and drink, we can't get
it. There's no way down that I can see. And we couldn't cross  all that open
country crawling with enemies, even if we did get down.'
'Still  we  shall  have to  try,'  said  Frodo.  'It's  no worse than I
expected. I never hoped to get across. I can't see any  hope  of it now. But
I've  still  got  to do the best I can. At  present that  is to avoid  being
captured  as long as possible.  So we must still go northwards, I think, and
see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.'
'I guess what it'll be like,' said  Sam. 'Where it's narrower the  Orcs
and Men will just be packed closer. You'll see, Mr. Frodo.'
'I dare say I shall, if  we ever get so  far,'  said  Frodo  and turned
away.
They  soon  found that it was impossible  to  make their way  along the
crest of  the Morgai, or anywhere along its  higher levels, pathless as they
were  and scored with deep ghylls. In the end they were  forced to  go  back
down the ravine that they had  climbed and seek for a way  along the valley.
It was  rough going,  for  they  dared not  cross  over  to the  path on the
westward side. After a mile or more  they  saw,  huddled in a  hollow at the
cliff's foot,  the orc-hold that  they had guessed  was near at hand: a wall
and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark mouth of a cave. There was no
movement to be seen, but the hobbits crept by cautiously, keeping as much as
they  could  to the thorn-brakes that  grew thickly at this point along both
sides of the old water-course.
They went two or three miles further, and  the orc-hold was hidden from
sight behind them; but  they had hardly begun  to breathe  more freely again
when harsh and loud they heard orc-voices. Quickly  they  slunk out of sight
behind a brown and stunted bush.  The voices drew nearer. Presently two orcs
came  into view. One was  clad in ragged  brown and was armed with a  bow of
horn;  it was of  a small  breed, black-skinned,  with  wide  and  snuffling
nostrils:  evidently  a   tracker  of  some  kind.  The  other  was   a  big
fighting-orc, like those of Shagrat's company, bearing the token of the Eye.
He  also had  a  bow at his back and carried  a short broad-headed spear. As
usual they  were  quarrelling, and  being of  different breeds they used the
Common Speech after their fashion.
Hardly  twenty  paces  from where the  hobbits  lurked  the  small  orc
stopped. 'Nar!' it snarled. 'I'm going  home.' It  pointed across the valley
to  the orc-hold. 'No good wearing my nose out  on  stones any more. There's
not a  trace left, I say. I've lost the scent through  giving way to you. It
went up into the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.'
'Not  much use  are you,  you little snufflers?' said the  big  orc. 'I
reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses.'
'Then what  have  you  seen with them?' snarled the  other.  'Garn! You
