I've  still  got  to do the best I can. At  present that  is to avoid  being
captured  as long as possible.  So we must still go northwards, I think, and
see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.'
'I guess what it'll be like,' said  Sam. 'Where it's narrower the  Orcs
and Men will just be packed closer. You'll see, Mr. Frodo.'
'I dare say I shall, if  we ever get so  far,'  said  Frodo  and turned
away.
They  soon  found that it was impossible  to  make their way  along the
crest of  the Morgai, or anywhere along its  higher levels, pathless as they
were  and scored with deep ghylls. In the end they were  forced to  go  back
down the ravine that they had  climbed and seek for a way  along the valley.
It was  rough going,  for  they  dared not  cross  over  to the  path on the
westward side. After a mile or more  they  saw,  huddled in a  hollow at the
cliff's foot,  the orc-hold that  they had guessed  was near at hand: a wall
and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark mouth of a cave. There was no
movement to be seen, but the hobbits crept by cautiously, keeping as much as
they  could  to the thorn-brakes that  grew thickly at this point along both
sides of the old water-course.
They went two or three miles further, and  the orc-hold was hidden from
sight behind them; but  they had hardly begun  to breathe  more freely again
when harsh and loud they heard orc-voices. Quickly  they  slunk out of sight
behind a brown and stunted bush.  The voices drew nearer. Presently two orcs
came  into view. One was  clad in ragged  brown and was armed with a  bow of
horn;  it was of  a small  breed, black-skinned,  with  wide  and  snuffling
nostrils:  evidently  a   tracker  of  some  kind.  The  other  was   a  big
fighting-orc, like those of Shagrat's company, bearing the token of the Eye.
He  also had  a  bow at his back and carried  a short broad-headed spear. As
usual they  were  quarrelling, and  being of  different breeds they used the
Common Speech after their fashion.
Hardly  twenty  paces  from where the  hobbits  lurked  the  small  orc
stopped. 'Nar!' it snarled. 'I'm going  home.' It  pointed across the valley
to  the orc-hold. 'No good wearing my nose out  on  stones any more. There's
not a  trace left, I say. I've lost the scent through  giving way to you. It
went up into the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.'
'Not  much use  are you,  you little snufflers?' said the  big  orc. 'I
reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses.'
'Then what  have  you  seen with them?' snarled the  other.  'Garn! You
don't even know what you're looking for.'
'Whose  blame's that?'  said the  soldier. 'Not mine. That  comes  from
Higher Up.  First they  say  it's a great Elf in bright armour, then  it's a
sort of small dwarf-man, then it must be a pack of rebel Uruk-hai; or  maybe
it's all the lot together.'
'Ar!' said the tracker. 'They've lost their  heads, that's what it  is.
And some of the bosses are going to lose their skins too, I guess, if what I
hear is true: Tower raided and all, and hundreds of your  lads done in,  and
prisoner got  away.  If that's  the  way you fighters  go on,  small  wonder
there's bad news from the battles.'
'Who says there's bad news?' shouted the soldier.
'Ar! Who says there isn't?'
'That's cursed rebel-talk, and I'll  stick  you, if  you don't shut  it
down, see?'
'All right, all right!' said  the tracker. 'I'll say  no more and go on
thinking.  But what's  the black  sneak got to do with  it all? That gobbler
with the flapping hands?'
'I  don't know. Nothing, maybe.  But he's up to no good, nosing around,
I'll  wager. Curse him! No sooner had  he slipped us and run  off than  word
came he's wanted alive, wanted quick.'
'Well,  I hope they  get  him and  put him  through  it,'  growled  the
tracker.  'He  messed up  the  scent  back  there,  pinching  that  cast-off
mail-shirt  that he  found,  and paddling all round the place before I could
get there.'
'It  saved his  life anyhow,' said  the soldier. 'Why, before I knew he
was wanted I shot him, as neat as neat, at fifty  paces  right in the  back;
but he ran on.'
'Garn!  You missed him,' said the  tracker. 'First you shoot wild, then
you run too  slow, and then you  send for the poor trackers. I've had enough
of you.' He loped off.
'You come back,' shouted the soldier, 'or I'll report you!'
'Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won't be captain any more.'
'I'll  give  your  name and  number  to the Nazgyl,'  said  the soldier
lowering his voice to a hiss. 'One of          them  's in charge at the Tower now.'
The other halted, and his voice was  full of fear and rage. 'You cursed
peaching sneakthief!' he yelled. 'You can't do  your job, and you can't even
stick by your own folk. Go to your filthy Shriekers, and may they freeze the
flesh off you! If the enemy  doesn't get them  first. They've done in Number
One, I've heard, and I hope it's true!'
The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing
behind  a  stone,  put an arrow in  his eye as he ran up, and he fell with a
crash. The other ran off across the valley and disappeared.
For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length  Sam stirred. 'Well I
call  that  neat as neat,'  he said. 'If this nice friendliness would spread
about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.'
'Quietly,  Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'There  may be  others about. We have
evidently had  a very narrow escape,  and the  hunt was hotter on our tracks
than we guessed. But that is the spirit of Mordor, Sam; and it has spread to
every corner of it. Orcs have always behaved like that, or so all tales say,
when they are on their own. But you can't get much hope out of it. They hate
us far  more,  altogether  and all the time. If  those two had seen us, they
would have dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.'
There was another long silence. Sam broke it again,  but with a whisper
this time.  'Did you hear what they  said  about             that gobbler   , Mr.  Frodo? I
told you Gollum wasn't dead yet, didn't I?'
'Yes, I remember. And I wondered  how you knew,' said Frodo. 'Well come
now!  I think we had better not move out from here again,  until it has gone
quite dark. So  you shall tell me how you know, and all about what happened.
If you can do it quietly.'
'I'll try,' said Sam, 'but when I think of  that Stinker I get so hot l
could shout.'
There the hobbits sat under the  cover  of  the  thorny bush, while the
drear light of  Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night; and  Sam
spoke into Frodo's  ear  all  that he  could  find  words  for  of  Gollum's
treacherous  attack, the  horror of Shelob, and his  own adventures with the
orcs. When  he  had finished,  Frodo said nothing  but  took  Sam's hand and
pressed it. At length he stirred.
'Well, I  suppose  we  must be going on  again,' he said. 'I wonder how
long it will be before  we really are  caught  and all the  toiling and  the
slinking will be over, and in vain.'  He stood up. 'It's dark, and we cannot
use the  Lady's glass. Keep it safe  for me, Sam. I  have nowhere to keep it
now, except in my hand, and  I shall need both hands in the blind night. But
Sting I give to you. I have  got an orc-blade, but I do not think it will be
my part to strike any blow again.'
