flesh off you! If the enemy  doesn't get them  first. They've done in Number
One, I've heard, and I hope it's true!'
The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing
behind  a  stone,  put an arrow in  his eye as he ran up, and he fell with a
crash. The other ran off across the valley and disappeared.
For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length  Sam stirred. 'Well I
call  that  neat as neat,'  he said. 'If this nice friendliness would spread
about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.'
'Quietly,  Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'There  may be  others about. We have
evidently had  a very narrow escape,  and the  hunt was hotter on our tracks
than we guessed. But that is the spirit of Mordor, Sam; and it has spread to
every corner of it. Orcs have always behaved like that, or so all tales say,
when they are on their own. But you can't get much hope out of it. They hate
us far  more,  altogether  and all the time. If  those two had seen us, they
would have dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.'
There was another long silence. Sam broke it again,  but with a whisper
this time.  'Did you hear what they  said  about             that gobbler   , Mr.  Frodo? I
told you Gollum wasn't dead yet, didn't I?'
'Yes, I remember. And I wondered  how you knew,' said Frodo. 'Well come
now!  I think we had better not move out from here again,  until it has gone
quite dark. So  you shall tell me how you know, and all about what happened.
If you can do it quietly.'
'I'll try,' said Sam, 'but when I think of  that Stinker I get so hot l
could shout.'
There the hobbits sat under the  cover  of  the  thorny bush, while the
drear light of  Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night; and  Sam
spoke into Frodo's  ear  all  that he  could  find  words  for  of  Gollum's
treacherous  attack, the  horror of Shelob, and his  own adventures with the
orcs. When  he  had finished,  Frodo said nothing  but  took  Sam's hand and
pressed it. At length he stirred.
'Well, I  suppose  we  must be going on  again,' he said. 'I wonder how
long it will be before  we really are  caught  and all the  toiling and  the
slinking will be over, and in vain.'  He stood up. 'It's dark, and we cannot
use the  Lady's glass. Keep it safe  for me, Sam. I  have nowhere to keep it
now, except in my hand, and  I shall need both hands in the blind night. But
Sting I give to you. I have  got an orc-blade, but I do not think it will be
my part to strike any blow again.'
It  was difficult and dangerous moving in  the  night  in the  pathless
land; but slowly and with much  stumbling the two hobbits  toiled on hour by
hour northward along the eastern edge of the stony valley. When a grey light
crept back over the western  heights, long after day had opened in the lands
beyond, they went into hiding again and slept a little, turn by turn. In his
times  of waking  Sam  was busy  with thoughts  of food. At  last when Frodo
roused himself and spoke of eating and making ready for yet  another effort,
he asked the question that was troubling him most.
'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, 'but have you any notion how
far there is still to go?'
'No, not any clear notion, Sam,' Frodo answered. 'In Rivendell before I
set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came
back
here; but I only remember it  vaguely. I remember clearest  that there was a
place in the north where the western  range and the  northern range send out
spurs that nearly meet. That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge
back by the  Tower.  It might be  a  good point at which  to cross.  But  of
course, if we get there, we shall be further than we were from the Mountain,
sixty miles from it,  I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve
leagues  north from the bridge now.  Even if  all goes  well, I could hardly
reach  the Mountain in  a week. I am afraid, Sam, that the  burden  will get
very heavy, and I shall go still slower as we get nearer.'
Sam  sighed. 'That's just as I feared,' he said. 'Well,  to say nothing
of water, we've got to eat less, Mr.  Frodo,  or else move a bit quicker, at
any rate while we're still in this valley. One more bite  and all the food's
ended, save the Elves' waybread.'
'I'll try  and be  a  bit  quicker, Sam,'  said  Frodo,  drawing a deep
breath. 'Come on then! Let's start another march!'
It was not yet quite dark again. They plodded along, on into the night.
The hours passed in  a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief halts. At the
first  hint of grey light  under the skirts of the canopy of shadow they hid
themselves again in a dark hollow under an overhanging stone.
Slowly  the  light  grew, until it  was clearer than it yet had been. A
strong wind from the West was now driving the fumes of Mordor from the
upper
airs. Before long the hobbits could make out the shape of the land for  some
miles  about  them.  The trough  between the  mountains  and  the Morgai had
steadily dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more
than a shelf in the steep faces of the Ephel D®ath; but to  the east it fell
as  sheerly as  ever down into Gorgoroth. Ahead the water-course came  to an
end in broken steps of rock; for out from the main range there sprang a high
barren spur, thrusting  eastward like a wall. To meet it there stretched out
from the grey and misty  northern  range  of Ered Lithui a long jutting arm;
and between the ends there  was a narrow gap: Carach Angren, the Isenmouthe,
beyond  which lay the deep  dale of Udyn.  In that dale  behind the Morannon
were the tunnels and deep armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for
the defence of the Black Gate of their  land; and there now  their  Lord was
gathering in haste great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the
West. Upon the out-thrust spurs forts and towers were built, and watch-fires
burned;  and all  across  the gap an earth-wall had been  raised, and a deep
trench delved that could be crossed only by a single bridge.
A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched
away from the main range, stood the old castle  of Durthang, now one of  the
many orc-holds  that  clustered about  the dale of  Udyn.  A  road,  already
visible in the growing light, came winding  down from it, until only a  mile
or two from where the hobbits  lay it turned east and ran along a  shelf cut
in the side of the  spur, and so went  down  into the plain,  and  on to the
Isenmouthe.
To  the hobbits as  they  looked  out it seemed that all their  journey
north had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky, and they
could  see  there  neither camps nor troops moving; but all  that region was
under the vigilance of the forts of Carach Angren.
'We have  come to a dead end, Sam,'  said Frodo. 'If we go on, we shall
only come up to that orc-tower, but the only  road to take is that road that
comes down from it - unless we go back. We can't climb up westward, or climb
down eastward.'
'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'We must take it and
chance our luck,  if there is  any  luck in  Mordor. We  might as  well give
ourselves up as wander  about any more,  or try  to go back. Our  food won't
last. We've got to make a dash for it!'
'All right, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Lead me! As long as  you've got any hope
left. Mine is gone. But I can't dash, Sam. I'll just plod along after you.'
'Before  you start  any more  plodding,  you need  sleep and food,  Mr.
Frodo. Come and take what you can get of them!'
