steadily dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more
than a shelf in the steep faces of the Ephel D®ath; but to  the east it fell
as  sheerly as  ever down into Gorgoroth. Ahead the water-course came  to an
end in broken steps of rock; for out from the main range there sprang a high
barren spur, thrusting  eastward like a wall. To meet it there stretched out
from the grey and misty  northern  range  of Ered Lithui a long jutting arm;
and between the ends there  was a narrow gap: Carach Angren, the Isenmouthe,
beyond  which lay the deep  dale of Udyn.  In that dale  behind the Morannon
were the tunnels and deep armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for
the defence of the Black Gate of their  land; and there now  their  Lord was
gathering in haste great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the
West. Upon the out-thrust spurs forts and towers were built, and watch-fires
burned;  and all  across  the gap an earth-wall had been  raised, and a deep
trench delved that could be crossed only by a single bridge.
A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched
away from the main range, stood the old castle  of Durthang, now one of  the
many orc-holds  that  clustered about  the dale of  Udyn.  A  road,  already
visible in the growing light, came winding  down from it, until only a  mile
or two from where the hobbits  lay it turned east and ran along a  shelf cut
in the side of the  spur, and so went  down  into the plain,  and  on to the
Isenmouthe.
To  the hobbits as  they  looked  out it seemed that all their  journey
north had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky, and they
could  see  there  neither camps nor troops moving; but all  that region was
under the vigilance of the forts of Carach Angren.
'We have  come to a dead end, Sam,'  said Frodo. 'If we go on, we shall
only come up to that orc-tower, but the only  road to take is that road that
comes down from it - unless we go back. We can't climb up westward, or climb
down eastward.'
'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'We must take it and
chance our luck,  if there is  any  luck in  Mordor. We  might as  well give
ourselves up as wander  about any more,  or try  to go back. Our  food won't
last. We've got to make a dash for it!'
'All right, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Lead me! As long as  you've got any hope
left. Mine is gone. But I can't dash, Sam. I'll just plod along after you.'
'Before  you start  any more  plodding,  you need  sleep and food,  Mr.
Frodo. Come and take what you can get of them!'
He gave  Frodo  water  and an additional wafer of the  waybread, and he
made  a pillow of his cloak for his master's  head. Frodo  was too  weary to
debate the matter, and Sam did not tell  him that he had drunk the last drop
of  their water, and eaten Sam's share of the food as well as  his own. When
Frodo was asleep Sam bent over him and listened to his breathing and scanned
his  face. It  was  lined and thin, and yet in  sleep it looked  content and
unafraid. 'Well, here goes, Master!' Sam muttered  to himself. 'I'll have to
leave you for a bit  and trust to luck. Water we must have, or we'll  get no
further.'
Sam  crept  out,  and flitting  from  stone to  stone  with  more  than
hobbit-care, he went down to the water-course, and then followed it for some
way as it climbed  north, until he came to the rock-steps where long ago, no
doubt,  its spring had come gushing  down  in  a little  waterfall. All  now
seemed dry and silent; but refusing to despair Sam stooped and listened, and
to his  delight he caught the sound of  trickling. Clambering a few steps up
he found a tiny stream of dark water that came out  from the  hill-side  and
filled a  little bare pool,  from which again it spilled, and vanished  then
under the barren stones.
Sam tasted the water, and it seemed good enough. Then  he drank deeply,
refilled the  bottle,  and turned  to go back.  At that  moment he caught  a
glimpse of a black form or shadow flitting among the rocks away near Frodo's
hiding-place.  Biting  back  a cry, he leapt  down from the spring and  ran,
jumping from stone to stone. It was  a  wary creature, difficult to see, but
Sam had little doubt about it: he longed to get  his hands on its  neck. But
it heard him coming and  slipped quickly away.  Sam  thought he  saw a  last
fleeting  glimpse  of  it,  peering  back  over  the  edge  of the  eastward
precipice, before it ducked and disappeared.
'Well, luck did not let me  down,' muttered Sam,  'but that was a  near
thing! Isn't it enough  to have orcs by the  thousand  without that stinking
villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been  shot!' He sat down by Frodo
and did not rouse him; but he did not dare to  go to  sleep himself. At last
when he felt his eyes closing and knew that his struggle to keep awake could
not go on much longer, he wakened Frodo gently.
'That  Gollum's  about   again,  I'm  afraid,  Mr.  Frodo,'   he  said.
'Leastways, if  it wasn't  him, then there's two of him. I went away to find
some water and  spied  him nosing  round just as I  turned back. I reckon it
isn't safe  for us  both to sleep  together,  and begging your pardon, but I
can't hold up my lids much longer.'
'Bless you, Sam!' said Frodo. 'Lie down  and take your proper turn! But
I'd rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he  won't give us away to them
- not unless he's caught himself.'
'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on  his own,' growled Sam.
'Keep your eyes open,  Mr. Frodo! There's  a bottle full of water. Drink up.
We can fill it again when we go on.' With that Sam plunged into sleep.
Light was fading when  he  woke.  Frodo sat  propped  against  the rock
behind, but he  had fallen asleep. The water-bottle  was empty. There was no
sign of Gollum.
Mordor-dark  had returned, and the watch-fires on  the  heights  burned
fierce and red, when the hobbits  set out  again on the most dangerous stage
of all  their  journey.  They  went first  to  the  little  spring, and then
climbing warily up they  came to the road at the  point  where it swung east
towards  the Isenmouthe  twenty miles away. It was not a broad road, and  it
had  no wall  or parapet along the edge and as it ran on the sheer drop from
its brink became deeper and deeper. The hobbits could hear no movements, and
after listening for a while they set off eastward at a steady pace.
After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short  way back the  road
had  bent a  little northward and  the stretch that they had passed over was
now screened  from  sight.  This proved  disastrous. They  rested  for  some
minutes and then went on; but they had not taken many steps when suddenly in
the stillness of  the  night they  heard the  sound that all along  they had
secretly dreaded: the  noise of marching feet. It was still some way  behind
them, but looking  back they could see  the twinkle of torches  coming round
the  bend less  than  a mile away,  and they  were moving fast: too fast for
Frodo to escape by flight along the road ahead.
'I feared  it, Sam,' said Frodo. 'We've  trusted to luck,  and  it  has
failed  us.  We're trapped.' He looked wildly up at the frowning wall, where
the road-builders of old had cut the rock sheer for many fathoms above their
heads. He ran to the other side and looked over the brink into a dark pit of
gloom.  'We're trapped at last!' he said He sank to the  ground beneath  the
wall of rock and bowed his head.
'Seems so,' said Sam. 'Well, we can but wait and see.' And with that he
sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff.
They did  not have  to wait long. The orcs were going at a  great pace.
Those in the foremost files  bore torches.  On they  came, red flames in the
