can't hold up my lids much longer.'
'Bless you, Sam!' said Frodo. 'Lie down  and take your proper turn! But
I'd rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he  won't give us away to them
- not unless he's caught himself.'
'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on  his own,' growled Sam.
'Keep your eyes open,  Mr. Frodo! There's  a bottle full of water. Drink up.
We can fill it again when we go on.' With that Sam plunged into sleep.
Light was fading when  he  woke.  Frodo sat  propped  against  the rock
behind, but he  had fallen asleep. The water-bottle  was empty. There was no
sign of Gollum.
Mordor-dark  had returned, and the watch-fires on  the  heights  burned
fierce and red, when the hobbits  set out  again on the most dangerous stage
of all  their  journey.  They  went first  to  the  little  spring, and then
climbing warily up they  came to the road at the  point  where it swung east
towards  the Isenmouthe  twenty miles away. It was not a broad road, and  it
had  no wall  or parapet along the edge and as it ran on the sheer drop from
its brink became deeper and deeper. The hobbits could hear no movements, and
after listening for a while they set off eastward at a steady pace.
After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short  way back the  road
had  bent a  little northward and  the stretch that they had passed over was
now screened  from  sight.  This proved  disastrous. They  rested  for  some
minutes and then went on; but they had not taken many steps when suddenly in
the stillness of  the  night they  heard the  sound that all along  they had
secretly dreaded: the  noise of marching feet. It was still some way  behind
them, but looking  back they could see  the twinkle of torches  coming round
the  bend less  than  a mile away,  and they  were moving fast: too fast for
Frodo to escape by flight along the road ahead.
'I feared  it, Sam,' said Frodo. 'We've  trusted to luck,  and  it  has
failed  us.  We're trapped.' He looked wildly up at the frowning wall, where
the road-builders of old had cut the rock sheer for many fathoms above their
heads. He ran to the other side and looked over the brink into a dark pit of
gloom.  'We're trapped at last!' he said He sank to the  ground beneath  the
wall of rock and bowed his head.
'Seems so,' said Sam. 'Well, we can but wait and see.' And with that he
sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff.
They did  not have  to wait long. The orcs were going at a  great pace.
Those in the foremost files  bore torches.  On they  came, red flames in the
dark, swiftly growing. Now Sam too bowed his head, hoping that it would hide
his face when the  torches reached  them; and he  set  their  shields before
their knees to hide their feet.
'If only  they  are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired  soldiers
alone and pass on!' he thought.
And so it  seemed that they would. The leading  orcs came loping along,
panting, holding their  heads down. They  were  a gang of the smaller breeds
being driven unwilling to their Dark Lord's wars; all they cared for  was to
get the march over and escape the whip. Beside them, running up and down the
line, went two of the large fierce         uruks  , cracking lashes and shouting. File
after file passed, and the tell-tale torchlight was  already some way ahead.
Sam held his  breath. Now more than half the line had gone by. Then suddenly
one of the slave-drivers spied the two figures  by the road-side. He flicked
a whip at them and yelled:  'Hi, you! Get up!' They did not answer, and with
a shout he halted the whole company.
'Come on, you slugs!' he cried.  'This is  no time  for  slouching.' He
took a step towards them, and even in the gloom he recognized the devices on
their shields.  'Deserting,  eh?'  he snarled.  'Or thinking of it? All your
folk  should  have been inside Udyn before yesterday evening. You know that.
Up you get and fall in, or I'll have your numbers and report you.'
They  struggled to their  feet, and keeping bent, limping like footsore
soldiers, they shuffled back towards the rear  of  the line. 'No, not at the
rear!' the slave-driver shouted.  'Three files up. And stay there, or you'll
know it,  when I come down the line!' He sent his  long  whip-lash  cracking
over their heads; then with another crack  and a yell he started the company
off again at a brisk trot.
It was hard enough for poor Sam, tired as he was;  but for Frodo it was
a torment, and soon a nightmare. He set his teeth and tried to stop his mind
from  thinking, and he struggled  on. The stench of the sweating  orcs about
him was stifling, and he began to gasp with thirst. On, on they went, and he
bent  all  his will to draw his breath and to make  his legs keep going; and
yet to  what evil end  he toiled and endured he did not dare to think. There
was no hope of falling out  unseen: Now and  again the orc-driver fell  back
and jeered at them.
'There now!' he laughed, flicking at their  legs. 'Where there's a whip
there's a  will, my slugs. Hold up! I'd give you a nice freshener  now, only
you'll get  as much lash as your skins will  carry when you come in late  to
your camp. Do you good. Don't you know we're at war?'
They had gone some miles, and the road was at  last running down a long
slope into the plain, when  Frodo's  strength began to give out and his will
wavered. He lurched and stumbled. Desperately Sam tried to help him and hold
him up,  though  he felt  that he could  himself hardly  stay  the pace much
longer.  At any moment now he knew that the end would come: his master
would
faint or fall, and  all would be discovered, and  their bitter efforts be in
vain. 'I'll have that big slave-driving devil anyway,' he thought.
Then just as  he  was putting his hand  to the hilt of his sword, there
came an unexpected relief.  They were out on the plain now and drawing  near
the entrance to Udyn. Some  way in  front  of it,  before  the  gate  at the
bridge-end, the  road  from the  west converged with others coming from  the
south, and from Barad-dyr.  Along all the roads troops were moving; for  the
Captains  of  the  West  were  advancing  and the Dark Lord was speeding his
forces  north.  So it  chanced that  several companies came together at  the
road-meeting, in the dark beyond the light of  the watch-fires on the  wall.
At once there was great  jostling  and  cursing as  each troop  tried to get
first to the gate and the ending of  their march.  Though the drivers yelled
and plied  their whips, scuffles broke out and  some blades  were  drawn.  A
troop of heavy-armed         uruks   from Barad-dyr charged into the Durthang line and
threw them into confusion.
Dazed as he  was with  pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped quickly
at his chance, and  threw  himself to the  ground, dragging Frodo down  with
him. Orcs fell over them, snarling and  cursing. Slowly on hand and knee the
hobbits  crawled  away  out of  the  turmoil, until  at last unnoticed  they
dropped  over the  further edge of the road. It  had a  high kerb  by  which
troop-leaders could  guide  themselves  in black night or  fog,  and it  was
banked up some feet above the level of the open land.
They  lay still  for a while.  It  was too dark to  seek  for cover, if
indeed there was any to  find; but Sam felt that  they ought at least to get
further away from the highways and out of the range of torch-light.
'Come on, Mr. Frodo!' he whispered.  'One more  crawl, and then you can
lie still.'
With a last despairing effort Frodo  raised  himself on  his hands, and
struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down into a shallow pit
that opened unexpectedly before them, and there he lay like a dead thing.
