your camp. Do you good. Don't you know we're at war?'
They had gone some miles, and the road was at  last running down a long
slope into the plain, when  Frodo's  strength began to give out and his will
wavered. He lurched and stumbled. Desperately Sam tried to help him and hold
him up,  though  he felt  that he could  himself hardly  stay  the pace much
longer.  At any moment now he knew that the end would come: his master
would
faint or fall, and  all would be discovered, and  their bitter efforts be in
vain. 'I'll have that big slave-driving devil anyway,' he thought.
Then just as  he  was putting his hand  to the hilt of his sword, there
came an unexpected relief.  They were out on the plain now and drawing  near
the entrance to Udyn. Some  way in  front  of it,  before  the  gate  at the
bridge-end, the  road  from the  west converged with others coming from  the
south, and from Barad-dyr.  Along all the roads troops were moving; for  the
Captains  of  the  West  were  advancing  and the Dark Lord was speeding his
forces  north.  So it  chanced that  several companies came together at  the
road-meeting, in the dark beyond the light of  the watch-fires on the  wall.
At once there was great  jostling  and  cursing as  each troop  tried to get
first to the gate and the ending of  their march.  Though the drivers yelled
and plied  their whips, scuffles broke out and  some blades  were  drawn.  A
troop of heavy-armed         uruks   from Barad-dyr charged into the Durthang line and
threw them into confusion.
Dazed as he  was with  pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped quickly
at his chance, and  threw  himself to the  ground, dragging Frodo down  with
him. Orcs fell over them, snarling and  cursing. Slowly on hand and knee the
hobbits  crawled  away  out of  the  turmoil, until  at last unnoticed  they
dropped  over the  further edge of the road. It  had a  high kerb  by  which
troop-leaders could  guide  themselves  in black night or  fog,  and it  was
banked up some feet above the level of the open land.
They  lay still  for a while.  It  was too dark to  seek  for cover, if
indeed there was any to  find; but Sam felt that  they ought at least to get
further away from the highways and out of the range of torch-light.
'Come on, Mr. Frodo!' he whispered.  'One more  crawl, and then you can
lie still.'
With a last despairing effort Frodo  raised  himself on  his hands, and
struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down into a shallow pit
that opened unexpectedly before them, and there he lay like a dead thing.
Chapter 3. Mount Doom
Sam put his ragged orc-cloak under  his master's head, and covered them
both with the grey robe of Lurien; and as he did so his thoughts went out to
that fair land, and to the Elves, and he hoped that the cloth woven by their
hands  might  have some virtue to keep them  hidden beyond all hope  in this
wilderness of fear. He heard the  scuffling and cries die down as the troops
passed  on through the Isenmouthe. It seemed that in the confusion  and  the
mingling of many  companies of various  kinds  they had not been missed, not
yet at any rate.
Sam  took a sip of water, but pressed Frodo  to  drink,  and  when  his
master had recovered a little he gave  him a whole  wafer of their  precious
waybread and made  him  eat it. Then, too worn out even to  feel  much fear,
they stretched themselves out. They slept a little in uneasy fits; for their
sweat grew chill on  them, and the  hard stones bit them, and they shivered.
Out of  the north from the  Black Gate  through  Cirith  Gorgor there flowed
whispering along the ground a thin cold air.
In the morning a  grey light came again, for  in  the high regions  the
West Wind  still blew, but down on the stones behind the fences of the Black
Land the air seemed almost dead, chill  and yet stifling. Sam looked  up out
of the hollow.  The land  all about was  dreary, flat  and drab-hued. On the
roads nearby nothing was moving now; but Sam feared the watchful eyes on
the
wall  of  the  Isenmouthe,  no  more   than   a   furlong   away  northward.
South-eastward, far off like a  dark standing shadow. loomed  the  Mountain.
Smokes  were  pouring from  it and while those that rose into  the upper air
trailed away  eastward, great rolling clouds  floated  down  its  sides  and
spread over the land. A  few miles to the north-east the  foothills  of  the
Ashen  Mountains stood  like  sombre grey  ghosts, behind  which  the  misty
northern heights rose  like  a line of distant cloud hardly darker than  the
lowering sky.
Sam  tried to  guess the distances and to decide what way they ought to
take.  It looks every step  of fifty miles,' he muttered gloomily staring at
the threatening mountain, 'and that'll take a week, if it takes  a day, with
Mr. Frodo as he is.' He shook his  head, and as he worked things out, slowly
a new dark thought  grew in his mind. Never  for long had  hope died in  his
staunch  heart, and  always until now he  had  taken some thought  for their
return.  But the  bitter  truth  came  home to him  at  last:  at best their
provision  would take them to  their goal; and when the task was done, there
they would come to  an end,  alone, houseless, foodless  in  the midst  of a
terrible desert. There could be no return.
'So that was the job I felt I had to  do when  I started,' thought Sam:
'to help  Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if that is
the job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see Bywater again, and
Rosie Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer and Marigold  and all. I can't
think somehow that Gandalf would have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand if there
hadn't a' been  any hope  of his  ever coming back at all. Things  all  went
wrong when  he went  down  in Moria.  I  wish he hadn't. He  would have done
something.'
But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to  die, it was turned to a new
strength. Sam's  plain  hobbit-face  grew stern,  almost  grim, as  the will
hardened in him, and he felt through  all his  limbs a thrill,  as if he was
turning into  some  creature  of  stone  and steel  that neither despair nor
weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue.
With  a new sense of responsibility he  brought  his  eyes  back to the
ground  near at hand, studying the  next move. As the light grew a little he
saw  to  his  surprise  that  what  from  a  distance  had  seemed  wide and
featureless  flats  were in fact  all broken  and tumbled. Indeed the  whole
surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes, as if, while
it was still a waste of soft mud, it had been smitten with a shower of bolts
and huge slingstones. The largest of these holes  were rimmed with ridges of
broken  rock, and broad fissures ran out from them in all directions. It was
a land in which it would be possible to  creep from hiding to hiding, unseen
by all but the most watchful eyes: possible at least for one  who was strong
and had no need for speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go before
life failed, it had an evil look.
Thinking  of all  these things Sam went back to his  master.  He had no
need to rouse  him.  Frodo was lying on his  back with eyes open, staring at
the  cloudy sky. 'Well, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'I've been having a look round
and thinking a bit. There's  nothing on the roads, and we'd best  be getting
away while there's a chance. Can you manage it?'
'I can manage it,' said Frodo. 'I must.'
