Bridge.  His task, according to the original plans  of the conspirators, was
to stay  behind and deal with inquisitive folk,  and  to keep up as long  as
possible the  pretence that Mr. Baggins  was still living at Crickhollow. He
had even brought along some old clothes of  Frodo's to help  him  in playing
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove.
'Excellent!' said Frodo,  when he understood the  plan. 'We  could  not
have  left  any  message behind for Gandalf otherwise.  I don't know whether
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk
a written message, in case they got in and  searched the house. But if Fatty
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we
have gone, that  decides me. I am going  into  the Old  Forest  first  thing
tomorrow.'
'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our
job than Fatty's - waiting here till Black Riders come.'
'You wait till you are well inside  the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.'
'It's no  good arguing about it any more,' said Merry.  'We have  still
got  to tidy up and put the finishing touches to  the packing, before we get
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.'
When at last he  had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for  some  time.
His  legs ached. He. was  glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually
he fell into a  vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking  out of a high
window over  a dark  sea of tangled trees.  Down below among the roots there
was the sound of creatures  crawling and snuffling.  He felt sure they would
smell him out sooner or later.
Then  he heard a noise in the distance.  At first he thought  it  was a
great wind  coming over the leaves of the forest. Then  he knew  that it was
not leaves, but the sound of the  Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in
waking life, though it  had often  troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he
was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on  a dark heath,
and there was a strange salt smell in  the air. Looking up he saw before him
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle  up the ridge
towards the  tower:  but  suddenly a light came in  the sky, and there was a
noise of thunder.
Chapter 6. The Old Forest
Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in  the room. Merry was standing
there with a candle  in one hand, and banging  on the  door with the  other.
'All right! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.
'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is  time to get up. It is half past four
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippin
is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to be
the  baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up  and
see us off.'
Soon after  six o'clock the  five  hobbits were  ready  to start. Fatty
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in
front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that  went through
a spinney behind  the house, and then  cut across several fields. The leaves
of  trees were  glistening, and every twig  was dripping; the grass was grey
with  cold dew. Everything was  still,  and far-away  noises seemed near and
clear:  fowls chattering  in a yard,  someone closing a  door of  a  distant
house.
In their shed they found the ponies;  sturdy  little beasts of the kind
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for  a long day's work. They mounted,
and  soon  they  were  riding off  into  the  mist,  which  seemed  to  open
reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for
about  an  hour,  slowly  and without talking,  they  saw  the Hedge looming
suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over  with silver cobwebs.  'How  are
you  going to get  through  this?'  asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry,
'and you will see.' He turned to the  left  along  the Hedge, and  soon they
came to a point  where it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A
cutting  had been made, at  some distance from the  Hedge, and  went sloping
gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at  the sides, which rose
steadily,  until suddenly  they arched  over and formed a  tunnel that dived
deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side.
Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he  said. 'I wish you were
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the
day is out. But good luck to you - today and every day!'
'If there  are no worse things ahead  than  the Old Forest, I  shall be
lucky,'  said  Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the  East Road: we  shall
soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.' 'Good-bye!' they cried, and
rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel.
It  was  dark and  damp. At the far  end it  was  closed  by  a gate of
thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had
all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock
clicked. The sound was ominous.
'There!' said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and
on the edge of the Old Forest.'
'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin.
'I don't know what  stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the
old bogey-stories Fatty's nurses  used to tell him, about goblins and wolves
and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I  don't believe them.
is
But the  Forest   queer. Everything in it  is very  much more  alive,  more
aware of what is going on, so to  speak, than things  are in the  Shire. And
the  trees do not like strangers. They watch  you. They  are usually content
merely to  watch  you,  as  long  as  daylight  lasts,  and  don't  do much.
Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a  branch,  or  stick  a root
out,  or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at  night things  can be most
alarming,  or so I am  told. I have  only once or twice  been in here  after
dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the  trees were whispering
to each  other,  passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language;
and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They  do  say the trees
do  actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In  fact long
ago they  attacked the Hedge: they came and  planted themselves right by it,
and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and
made a great  bonfire in the  Forest, and  burned all the  ground in  a long
strip east of the Hedge. After that the  trees gave up the attack,  but they
became very unfriendly.  There  is  still a wide  bare  space not far inside
where the bonfire was made.'
'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin.
'There are  various queer things living deep  in the Forest, and on the
far  side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never  seen
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever  one comes inside one
finds
open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time  to time in a queer
fashion.  Not far from  this tunnel there is, or was for  a  long time,  the
beginning of quite  a broad path leading to the Bonfire  Glade,  and then on
