a new dark thought  grew in his mind. Never  for long had  hope died in  his
staunch  heart, and  always until now he  had  taken some thought  for their
return.  But the  bitter  truth  came  home to him  at  last:  at best their
provision  would take them to  their goal; and when the task was done, there
they would come to  an end,  alone, houseless, foodless  in  the midst  of a
terrible desert. There could be no return.
'So that was the job I felt I had to  do when  I started,' thought Sam:
'to help  Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if that is
the job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see Bywater again, and
Rosie Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer and Marigold  and all. I can't
think somehow that Gandalf would have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand if there
hadn't a' been  any hope  of his  ever coming back at all. Things  all  went
wrong when  he went  down  in Moria.  I  wish he hadn't. He  would have done
something.'
But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to  die, it was turned to a new
strength. Sam's  plain  hobbit-face  grew stern,  almost  grim, as  the will
hardened in him, and he felt through  all his  limbs a thrill,  as if he was
turning into  some  creature  of  stone  and steel  that neither despair nor
weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue.
With  a new sense of responsibility he  brought  his  eyes  back to the
ground  near at hand, studying the  next move. As the light grew a little he
saw  to  his  surprise  that  what  from  a  distance  had  seemed  wide and
featureless  flats  were in fact  all broken  and tumbled. Indeed the  whole
surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes, as if, while
it was still a waste of soft mud, it had been smitten with a shower of bolts
and huge slingstones. The largest of these holes  were rimmed with ridges of
broken  rock, and broad fissures ran out from them in all directions. It was
a land in which it would be possible to  creep from hiding to hiding, unseen
by all but the most watchful eyes: possible at least for one  who was strong
and had no need for speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go before
life failed, it had an evil look.
Thinking  of all  these things Sam went back to his  master.  He had no
need to rouse  him.  Frodo was lying on his  back with eyes open, staring at
the  cloudy sky. 'Well, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'I've been having a look round
and thinking a bit. There's  nothing on the roads, and we'd best  be getting
away while there's a chance. Can you manage it?'
'I can manage it,' said Frodo. 'I must.'
Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind
such  cover  as they could find,  but moving always in  a slant towards  the
foothills of the northern  range. But as they went the  most easterly of the
roads followed them, until it ran  off, hugging the skirts of the mountains,
away into a wall of black shadow far ahead. Neither  man  nor orc now  moved
along its flat grey stretches; for the Dark Lord  had almost  completed  the
movement of his forces, and even in the  fastness of his own realm he sought
the secrecy of night, fearing the winds of the world that had turned against
him, tearing aside his veils, and troubled with  tidings of  bold spies that
had passed through his fences.
The hobbits had  gone a few weary  miles when they halted. Frodo seemed
nearly  spent. Sam saw that he could not  go much further in  this  fashion,
crawling, stooping, now picking  a doubtful way very slowly, now hurrying at
a stumbling run.
'I'm  going  back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr.  Frodo,' he
said. 'Trust to  luck again! It nearly failed us  last time,  but  it didn't
quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.'
He was taking a far greater risk  than he knew; but  Frodo was too much
occupied  with his burden and with the  struggle in  his mind to debate, and
almost too hopeless  to care. They climbed  on to the  causeway and  trudged
along, down the hard cruel road that led to the Dark Tower itself. But their
luck held, and for the rest of that day they  met no living or moving thing;
and when night fell they vanished into the darkness of Mordor. All  the land
now brooded as at the coming of a  great storm: for the Captains of the West
had passed  the Cross-roads and  set  flames  in  the deadly fields of Imlad
Morgul.
So  the  desperate  journey  went  on, as the Ring went  south and  the
banners of the  kings rode  north. For the hobbits each day,  each mile. was
more  bitter than the one before, as  their  strength lessened and  the land
became more  evil.  They met no enemies by day. At times  by night,  as they
cowered or drowsed uneasily in some hiding beside the road, they heard cries
and the  noise  of  many  feet or the swift passing of some  cruelly  ridden
steed. But far  worse than all  such  perils was the ever-approaching threat
that  beat  upon them as they went: the  dreadful menace of  the  Power that
waited, brooding in  deep thought and sleepless malice behind  the dark veil
about  its  Throne.  Nearer  and nearer it drew,  looming blacker, like  the
oncoming of a wall of night at the last end of the world.
There  came at  last a dreadful nightfall; and even  as the Captains of
the West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wanderers came to
an  hour of blank despair. Four days had passed since they had  escaped from
the orcs,  but the  time lay behind  them like an ever-darkening  dream. All
this  last  day Frodo  had not  spoken,  but had  walked  half-bowed,  often
stumbling, as if his eyes no longer saw the way before his feet. Sam guessed
that  among  all their  pains he  bore the worst, the growing weight  of the
Ring, a  burden on  the  body and a torment  to his  mind. Anxiously Sam had
noted  how his master's left hand would often be raised  as if to ward  on a
blow,  or to  screen his shrinking eyes from a dreadful  Eye that sought  to
look  in them.  And sometimes  his right  hand  would creep  to  his breast,
clutching, and  then  slowly,  as  the will recovered mastery, it  would  be
withdrawn.
Now as the blackness of night  returned Frodo sat, his head between his
knees, his arms  hanging wearily  to the ground where  his hands lay  feebly
twitching. Sam watched him, till  night covered them both and hid them  from
one another. He could no longer find any words to say;  and he turned to his
own dark thoughts. As for himself, though weary and under a  shadow of fear,
he still  had some strength left. The         lembas    had a virtue without which they
would  long  ago have  lain down to die. It did  not satisfy desire, and  at
times Sam's mind  was filled with the memories of food, and the  longing for
simple  bread  and meats.  And yet this waybread of the  Elves had a potency
that increased as travellers  relied on it alone and did  not mingle it with
other foods. It fed the will, and  it gave strength to endure, and to master
sinew  and limb beyond the measure of mortal  kind. But  now a  new decision
must be  made. They could not follow  this road any  longer; for  it went on
eastward  into  the  great Shadow, but the Mountain  now  loomed  upon their
right, almost due south, and they must turn towards it. Yet  still before it
there stretched a wide region of fuming, barren, ash-ridden land.
'Water, water!'  muttered  Sam.  He had  stinted  himself,  and in  his
parched mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care they
now  had  very little left, perhaps half  his bottle, and  maybe there  were
still days to go.  All would long ago have been spent, if they had not dared
to follow the  orc-road. For at long intervals on that highway  cisterns had
been built  for  the use  of troops  sent in  haste  through  the  waterless
regions. In one  Sam had found some water left, stale, muddied by  the orcs,
but still sufficient  for their desperate case. Yet that was now a  day ago.
