There  came at  last a dreadful nightfall; and even  as the Captains of
the West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wanderers came to
an  hour of blank despair. Four days had passed since they had  escaped from
the orcs,  but the  time lay behind  them like an ever-darkening  dream. All
this  last  day Frodo  had not  spoken,  but had  walked  half-bowed,  often
stumbling, as if his eyes no longer saw the way before his feet. Sam guessed
that  among  all their  pains he  bore the worst, the growing weight  of the
Ring, a  burden on  the  body and a torment  to his  mind. Anxiously Sam had
noted  how his master's left hand would often be raised  as if to ward  on a
blow,  or to  screen his shrinking eyes from a dreadful  Eye that sought  to
look  in them.  And sometimes  his right  hand  would creep  to  his breast,
clutching, and  then  slowly,  as  the will recovered mastery, it  would  be
withdrawn.
Now as the blackness of night  returned Frodo sat, his head between his
knees, his arms  hanging wearily  to the ground where  his hands lay  feebly
twitching. Sam watched him, till  night covered them both and hid them  from
one another. He could no longer find any words to say;  and he turned to his
own dark thoughts. As for himself, though weary and under a  shadow of fear,
he still  had some strength left. The         lembas    had a virtue without which they
would  long  ago have  lain down to die. It did  not satisfy desire, and  at
times Sam's mind  was filled with the memories of food, and the  longing for
simple  bread  and meats.  And yet this waybread of the  Elves had a potency
that increased as travellers  relied on it alone and did  not mingle it with
other foods. It fed the will, and  it gave strength to endure, and to master
sinew  and limb beyond the measure of mortal  kind. But  now a  new decision
must be  made. They could not follow  this road any  longer; for  it went on
eastward  into  the  great Shadow, but the Mountain  now  loomed  upon their
right, almost due south, and they must turn towards it. Yet  still before it
there stretched a wide region of fuming, barren, ash-ridden land.
'Water, water!'  muttered  Sam.  He had  stinted  himself,  and in  his
parched mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care they
now  had  very little left, perhaps half  his bottle, and  maybe there  were
still days to go.  All would long ago have been spent, if they had not dared
to follow the  orc-road. For at long intervals on that highway  cisterns had
been built  for  the use  of troops  sent in  haste  through  the  waterless
regions. In one  Sam had found some water left, stale, muddied by  the orcs,
but still sufficient  for their desperate case. Yet that was now a  day ago.
There was no hope of any more.
At last  wearied with his cares Sam drowsed, leaving the morrow till it
came; he could do no more. Dream and waking mingled uneasily. He saw
lights
like gloating yes, and dark creeping shapes, and he heard noises as of  wild
beasts  or  the dreadful cries of tortured things; and he would start  up to
find the world all dark and only  empty blackness all about him. Once  only,
as he stood and stared wildly round,  did it seem that, though now awake, he
could still see pale lights like eyes; but soon they flickered and vanished.
The hateful night  passed  slowly  and  reluctantly. Such  daylight  as
followed was dim; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was ever mirky,
while  out  from the Dark Tower  there crept the veils of Shadow that Sauron
wove about himself. Frodo was lying on his back not moving. Sam stood
beside
him, reluctant to speak, and yet knowing that the word now lay with him:  he
must set his  master's will to work for another effort. At  length, stooping
and caressing Frodo's brow, he spoke in his ear.
'Wake up, Master!' he said. 'Time for another start.'
As  if roused by a sudden  bell,  Frodo rose quickly,  and stood up and
looked away southwards; but when his eyes beheld the Mountain and the desert
he quailed again.
'I can't manage it, Sam,' he said. 'It is such a weight to carry,  such
a weight.'
Sam knew before he spoke, that  it was vain, and that  such words might
do more harm than good, but in his pity he could not  keep silent. 'Then let
me carry it a bit  for you, Master,' he said. 'You know I would, and gladly,
as long as I have any strength.'
A wild light came  into Frodo's  eyes. 'Stand away! Don't touch me!' he
cried. 'It is mine,  I say. Be off!' His hand strayed to his sword-hilt. But
then quickly his voice changed. 'No, no,  Sam,' he said sadly. 'But you must
understand. It is my  burden,  and no  one  else can bear it. It is too late
now, Sam dear. You can't help me in that way again. I am almost in its power
now. I could not give it up, and if you tried to take it I should go mad.'
Sam  nodded. 'I understand,'  he  said.  'But  I've been thinking,  Mr.
Frodo, there's other things we might do without. Why not lighten  the load a
bit? We're going that way now, as straight as we can make it.' He pointed to
the Mountain. 'It's no good taking anything we're not sure to need.'
Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. 'No,' he said, 'we shan't need
much on that road.  And  at its  end  nothing.' Picking up his orc-shield he
flung it away and threw his helmet after it. Then pulling off the grey cloak
he undid  the  heavy  belt and let it fall to the ground,  and  the sheathed
sword with it. The shreds of the black cloak he tore off and scattered.
'There, I'll be  an orc  no more,' he  cried, 'and  I'll bear no weapon
fair or foul. Let them take me, if they will!'
Sam did likewise, and put aside his  orc-gear; and he took  out all the
things  in  his pack.  Somehow  each of them had become dear to him, if only
because he had borne them so far with so much toil. Hardest of all it was to
part with  his cooking-gear.  Tears welled in  his eyes  at  the thought  of
casting it away.
'Do you  remember that  bit  of  rabbit, Mr. Frodo?' he  said. 'And our
place under the warm bank in  Captain  Faramir's  country, the  day I saw an
oliphaunt?'
'No, I  am afraid not,  Sam,'  said Frodo. 'At  least, I know that such
things happened,  but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water,
no sound of wind,  no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or
star  are left to me. I am  naked in  the  dark.  Sam, and there is  no veil
between me  and  the wheel  of fire. I begin to see  it even  with my waking
eyes, and all else fades.'
Sam went  to him and kissed his hand. 'Then the sooner we're rid of it,
the sooner  to rest,'  he said  haltingly, finding no  better  words to say.
'Talking won't mend nothing,' he muttered to himself,  as he gathered up all
the  things  that they had chosen to cast away. He was  not willing to leave
them lying open in the wilderness  for any eyes  to see. 'Stinker picked  up
that  orc-shirt,  seemingly,  and he  isn't going to add a sword  to it. His
hands are bad enough when  empty. And he isn't going to mess  with my pans!'
With  that he carried all  the gear away to  one of the many gaping fissures
that scored  the land and threw them in. The clatter of his precious pans as
they fell down into the dark was like a death-knell to his heart.
He came back to Frodo, and then of his elven-rope he  cut a short piece
to  serve his master  as a girdle and bind  the grey cloak close  about  his
waist. The rest he carefully coiled and put back in his pack. Beside that he
kept  only the remnants of  their waybread  and the  water-bottle, and Sting
still hanging by his belt; and hidden away in a pocket of his tunic next his
breast the phial of Galadriel and the  little box that  she gave him for his
