Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. 'No,' he said, 'we shan't need
much on that road.  And  at its  end  nothing.' Picking up his orc-shield he
flung it away and threw his helmet after it. Then pulling off the grey cloak
he undid  the  heavy  belt and let it fall to the ground,  and  the sheathed
sword with it. The shreds of the black cloak he tore off and scattered.
'There, I'll be  an orc  no more,' he  cried, 'and  I'll bear no weapon
fair or foul. Let them take me, if they will!'
Sam did likewise, and put aside his  orc-gear; and he took  out all the
things  in  his pack.  Somehow  each of them had become dear to him, if only
because he had borne them so far with so much toil. Hardest of all it was to
part with  his cooking-gear.  Tears welled in  his eyes  at  the thought  of
casting it away.
'Do you  remember that  bit  of  rabbit, Mr. Frodo?' he  said. 'And our
place under the warm bank in  Captain  Faramir's  country, the  day I saw an
oliphaunt?'
'No, I  am afraid not,  Sam,'  said Frodo. 'At  least, I know that such
things happened,  but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water,
no sound of wind,  no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or
star  are left to me. I am  naked in  the  dark.  Sam, and there is  no veil
between me  and  the wheel  of fire. I begin to see  it even  with my waking
eyes, and all else fades.'
Sam went  to him and kissed his hand. 'Then the sooner we're rid of it,
the sooner  to rest,'  he said  haltingly, finding no  better  words to say.
'Talking won't mend nothing,' he muttered to himself,  as he gathered up all
the  things  that they had chosen to cast away. He was  not willing to leave
them lying open in the wilderness  for any eyes  to see. 'Stinker picked  up
that  orc-shirt,  seemingly,  and he  isn't going to add a sword  to it. His
hands are bad enough when  empty. And he isn't going to mess  with my pans!'
With  that he carried all  the gear away to  one of the many gaping fissures
that scored  the land and threw them in. The clatter of his precious pans as
they fell down into the dark was like a death-knell to his heart.
He came back to Frodo, and then of his elven-rope he  cut a short piece
to  serve his master  as a girdle and bind  the grey cloak close  about  his
waist. The rest he carefully coiled and put back in his pack. Beside that he
kept  only the remnants of  their waybread  and the  water-bottle, and Sting
still hanging by his belt; and hidden away in a pocket of his tunic next his
breast the phial of Galadriel and the  little box that  she gave him for his
own.
Now  at  last  they turned  their faces to  the Mountain  and  set out,
thinking no more of concealment,  bending  their weariness and failing wills
only  to the  one task of going on. In  the dimness  of  its dreary day  few
things even  in  that land  of  vigilance could have espied them, save  from
close  at hand. Of all the slaves of  the  Dark  Lord, only the Nazgyl could
have warned him of the  peril  that crept, small  but  indomitable, into the
very  heart of his  guarded realm. But the Nazgyl and their black wings were
abroad on another errand: they  were  gathered far away, shadowing the march
of  the Captains of the West, and thither the  thought of the Dark Tower was
turned.
That day it seemed to Sam that his master  had found some new strength,
more than could be explained by the small lightening of the load that he had
to carry.  In  the first marches they  went  further and faster than he  had
hoped. The land was rough  and hostile, and yet they made much progress, and
ever the Mountain drew nearer.  But as the  day wore on and all too soon the
dim light began to fail,  Frodo stooped again, and  began to stagger, as  if
the renewed effort had squandered his remaining strength.
At  their last halt he sank down and said: 'I'm thirsty,  Sam,' and did
not speak  again. Sam gave him  a mouthful  of water; only one more mouthful
remained. He went without himself; and now as once more the  night of
Mordor
closed over  them, through all his thoughts there came  the memory of water;
and every brook  or  stream or fount  that he  had  ever  seen, under  green
willow-shades or twinkling in  the sun, danced  and rippled for his  torment
behind the blindness of his eyes. He felt the cool mud about his toes  as he
paddled in the Pool at Bywater with Jolly Cotton and Tom and Nibs, and their
sister  Rosie. 'But that was years  ago,'  he sighed, 'and far away. The way
back, if there is one, goes past the Mountain.'
He could not sleep and he held a  debate with himself. 'Well, come now,
we've done better than you hoped,' he said sturdily.  'Began  well anyway. I
reckon we  crossed half the distance before we stopped. One more day will do
it.' And then he paused.
'Don't  be a fool, Sam Gamgee,' came  an answer  in  his own voice. 'He
won't go another day like that, if he moves at all. And you can't go on much
longer giving him all the water and most of the food.'
'I can go on a good way though, and I will.'
'Where to?'
'To the Mountain, of course.'
'But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there, what are you
going to do? He won't be able to do anything for himself.'
To his dismay Sam realized that he  had not  got an answer  to this. He
had no clear idea  at all. Frodo  had not spoken much to him  of his errand,
and Sam only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow to be put into the fire.
'The Cracks of  Doom,' he muttered, the old name rising  to his mind. 'Well,
if Master knows how to find them, I don't.'
'There you are!' came the answer. 'It's  all quite useless.  He said so
himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and  toiling. You could have lain
down and gone to sleep  together days ago, if you hadn't been so dogged. But
you'll die just the same, or worse. You might just as well lie down  now and
give it up. You'll never get to the top anyway.'
'I'll get there, if  I leave everything but my bones behind,' said Sam.
'And I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop
arguing!'
At  that moment Sam felt a  tremor in the  ground  beneath  him, and he
heard or  sensed a deep remote rumble as  of  thunder  imprisoned  under the
earth. There was a brief  red flame that flickered under the clouds and died
away. The Mountain too slept uneasily.
The last stage of their journey to  Orodruin came, and it was a torment
greater than Sam had ever thought that he could bear. He was in pain, and so
parched that he could no longer swallow even a mouthful of food. It remained
dark, not  only because of the  smokes of the Mountain: there seemed to be a
storm  coming  up,  and  away  to  the  south-east there  was  a  shimmer of
lightnings under the black skies. Worst of all,  the air  was full of fumes;
breathing was painful and difficult, and  a dizziness  came on them, so that
they staggered and often fell. And  yet their wills did not  yield, and they
struggled on.
The  Mountain crept  up ever nearer, until, if they  lifted their heavy
heads, it  filled all  their sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass of
ash  and slag and burned stone, out  of which a  sheer-sided cone was raised
into  the clouds. Before the  daylong dusk ended and true  night  came again
they had crawled and stumbled to its very feet.
With a gasp  Frodo cast  himself on  the ground. Sam sat by him. To his
surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear again. No more
