'Where to?'
'To the Mountain, of course.'
'But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there, what are you
going to do? He won't be able to do anything for himself.'
To his dismay Sam realized that he  had not  got an answer  to this. He
had no clear idea  at all. Frodo  had not spoken much to him  of his errand,
and Sam only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow to be put into the fire.
'The Cracks of  Doom,' he muttered, the old name rising  to his mind. 'Well,
if Master knows how to find them, I don't.'
'There you are!' came the answer. 'It's  all quite useless.  He said so
himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and  toiling. You could have lain
down and gone to sleep  together days ago, if you hadn't been so dogged. But
you'll die just the same, or worse. You might just as well lie down  now and
give it up. You'll never get to the top anyway.'
'I'll get there, if  I leave everything but my bones behind,' said Sam.
'And I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop
arguing!'
At  that moment Sam felt a  tremor in the  ground  beneath  him, and he
heard or  sensed a deep remote rumble as  of  thunder  imprisoned  under the
earth. There was a brief  red flame that flickered under the clouds and died
away. The Mountain too slept uneasily.
The last stage of their journey to  Orodruin came, and it was a torment
greater than Sam had ever thought that he could bear. He was in pain, and so
parched that he could no longer swallow even a mouthful of food. It remained
dark, not  only because of the  smokes of the Mountain: there seemed to be a
storm  coming  up,  and  away  to  the  south-east there  was  a  shimmer of
lightnings under the black skies. Worst of all,  the air  was full of fumes;
breathing was painful and difficult, and  a dizziness  came on them, so that
they staggered and often fell. And  yet their wills did not  yield, and they
struggled on.
The  Mountain crept  up ever nearer, until, if they  lifted their heavy
heads, it  filled all  their sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass of
ash  and slag and burned stone, out  of which a  sheer-sided cone was raised
into  the clouds. Before the  daylong dusk ended and true  night  came again
they had crawled and stumbled to its very feet.
With a gasp  Frodo cast  himself on  the ground. Sam sat by him. To his
surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear again. No more
debates disturbed  his mind.  He knew all the arguments of despair and would
not listen to them. His will was set, and only death would break it. He felt
no longer either desire  or need of sleep, but  rather  of  watchfulness. He
knew  that all the hazards and perils were now  drawing together to a point:
the next day would  be a day of doom, the day  of final  effort or disaster,
the last gasp.
But when  would it come? The night seemed endless and  timeless, minute
after  minute  falling dead and adding up to  no  passing hour,  bringing no
change. Sam  began to wonder if a second darkness had begun and no day
would
ever  reappear. At  last he  groped  for  Frodo's  hand.  It  was  cold  and
trembling. His master was shivering.
'I  didn't ought  to have left  my blanket  behind,' muttered Sam;  and
lying down he tried to comfort Frodo with his arms and body. Then sleep took
him,  and the dim light of  the last day of  their  quest found them side by
side. The wind  had fallen  the day before  as it shifted from the West, and
now  it came from the North  and began  to rise; and slowly the light of the
unseen Sun filtered down into the shadows where the hobbits lay.
'Now for it! Now  for the last  gasp!' said Sam as he  struggled to his
feet.  He bent over Frodo, rousing  him gently.  Frodo groaned; but  with  a
great effort of will he staggered up; and then he fell upon his knees again.
He raised his eyes with difficulty to the dark slopes of Mount Doom towering
above him, and then pitifully he began to crawl forward on his hands.
Sam looked at him and wept in his heart, but  no tears came to his  dry
and stinging eyes. 'I said I'd carry him, if it broke my back,' he muttered,
'and I will!'
'Come, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I can't carry it for you, but I can carry
you and  it as well.  So  up you get! Come on, Mr. Frodo dear! Sam will give
you a ride. Just tell him where to go, and he'll go.'
As Frodo clung upon his back, arms loosely about his neck, legs clasped
firmly under his arms, Sam staggered to his  feet; and then to his amazement
he felt the  burden light. He had feared that he would  have barely strength
to lift  his  master alone, and beyond that he had expected to share in  the
dreadful dragging weight of the  accursed  Ring.  But it was not so. Whether
because Frodo  was so worn by his  long pains, wound  of knife, and venomous
sting,  and  sorrow, fear, and homeless wandering, or  because some  gift of
final  strength was given to  him, Sam lifted Frodo with no more  difficulty
than if he were carrying a hobbit-child pig-a-back in some romp on the lawns
or hayfields of the Shire. He took a deep breath and started off.
They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little
to the westward; there its long grey  slopes, though broken, were not sheer.
Frodo did  not speak,  and so Sam  struggled on as best he could, having  no
guidance but the will to climb as high as might be  before his strength gave
out  and his will broke. On he toiled, up and up, turning this way and  that
to lessen  the slope, often stumbling forward, and at the last crawling like
a snail  with  a  heavy burden on its back. When his will could drive him no
further, and his limbs gave way, he stopped and laid his master gently down.
Frodo opened his eyes and  drew a breath.  It was easier  to breathe up
here  above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. 'Thank you,  Sam,'
he said in a cracked whisper. 'How far is there to go?'
'I don't know,' said Sam, 'because I don't know where we're going.'
He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to see how far
his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing ominous and alone had
looked taller than it was. Sam saw  now that it was less lofty than the high
passes of the Ephel D®ath which  he and Frodo had  scaled. The  confused and
tumbled shoulders of its great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above
the plain,  and above them was  reared half as  high again its  tall central
cone, like a vast oast  or chimney capped with a jagged  crater. But already
Sam was  more than half way up  the base, and the plain of Gorgoroth was dim
below him, wrapped in fume and shadow. As he looked up he would have
given a
shout. if his parched throat had allowed him; for amid the rugged humps  and
shoulders above him he saw plainly a path or road.  It climbed like a rising
girdle from the west and wound snakelike about the Mountain, until before it
went  round out of  view it reached the foot  of the  cone upon its  eastern
side.
Sam could  not see  the course  immediately above  him,  where  it  was
lowest, for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but  he  guessed that
if he could only struggle on just a little way further up, they would strike
this path. A gleam of hope returned to  him. They might conquer the Mountain
yet. 'Why, it might have  been put there a-purpose!' he said to himself. 'If
it wasn't there, I'd have to say I was beaten in the end.'
The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam. He did not know it,
but he was looking at Sauron's Road  from Barad-dyr to the Sammath Naur, the
