than if he were carrying a hobbit-child pig-a-back in some romp on the lawns
or hayfields of the Shire. He took a deep breath and started off.
They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little
to the westward; there its long grey  slopes, though broken, were not sheer.
Frodo did  not speak,  and so Sam  struggled on as best he could, having  no
guidance but the will to climb as high as might be  before his strength gave
out  and his will broke. On he toiled, up and up, turning this way and  that
to lessen  the slope, often stumbling forward, and at the last crawling like
a snail  with  a  heavy burden on its back. When his will could drive him no
further, and his limbs gave way, he stopped and laid his master gently down.
Frodo opened his eyes and  drew a breath.  It was easier  to breathe up
here  above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. 'Thank you,  Sam,'
he said in a cracked whisper. 'How far is there to go?'
'I don't know,' said Sam, 'because I don't know where we're going.'
He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to see how far
his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing ominous and alone had
looked taller than it was. Sam saw  now that it was less lofty than the high
passes of the Ephel D®ath which  he and Frodo had  scaled. The  confused and
tumbled shoulders of its great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above
the plain,  and above them was  reared half as  high again its  tall central
cone, like a vast oast  or chimney capped with a jagged  crater. But already
Sam was  more than half way up  the base, and the plain of Gorgoroth was dim
below him, wrapped in fume and shadow. As he looked up he would have
given a
shout. if his parched throat had allowed him; for amid the rugged humps  and
shoulders above him he saw plainly a path or road.  It climbed like a rising
girdle from the west and wound snakelike about the Mountain, until before it
went  round out of  view it reached the foot  of the  cone upon its  eastern
side.
Sam could  not see  the course  immediately above  him,  where  it  was
lowest, for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but  he  guessed that
if he could only struggle on just a little way further up, they would strike
this path. A gleam of hope returned to  him. They might conquer the Mountain
yet. 'Why, it might have  been put there a-purpose!' he said to himself. 'If
it wasn't there, I'd have to say I was beaten in the end.'
The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam. He did not know it,
but he was looking at Sauron's Road  from Barad-dyr to the Sammath Naur, the
Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower's huge western gate it came over a
deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron, and then passing  into the plain it ran
for a league between  two smoking  chasms,  and so  reached  a  long sloping
causeway that led up on to the Mountain's eastern side.  Thence, turning and
encircling all  its wide girth from south to north, it climbed at last, high
in the upper cone, but still far from the reeking summit, to a dark entrance
that  gazed back  east  straight  to  the  Window  of  the  Eye  in Sauron's
shadow-mantled fortress. Often blocked  or destroyed by  the tumults  of the
Mountain's furnaces, always  that road was repaired and cleaned again by the
labours of countless orcs.
Sam drew a deep breath. There was a path, but how he was to get  up the
slope to it he did not know. First he must ease his aching back. He lay flat
beside Frodo for a  while. Neither spoke. Slowly the light  grew. Suddenly a
sense of urgency which  he did not understand  came to Sam. It was almost as
if he had been called: 'Now, now, or it will be too late!' He braced himself
and  got up. Frodo also seemed to have felt  the  call. He struggled to  his
knees.
'I'll crawl, Sam,' he gasped.
So foot by foot, like small grey insects, they crept up the slope. They
came to the path and found  that it was broad, paved with broken rubble  and
beaten  ash.  Frodo clambered on  to  it,  and  then  moved  as  if by  some
compulsion he turned slowly to face  the East. Far off the shadows of Sauron
hung; but  torn by some gust of wind out of the world, or else moved by some
great  disquiet within,  the mantling  clouds swirled, and for a moment drew
aside; and  then he saw,  rising  black,  blacker and  darker than  the vast
shades  amid which it  stood,  the  cruel pinnacles  and  iron  crown of the
topmost tower of Barad-dyr. One moment  only it stared out, but as from some
great window immeasurably high there stabbed northward  a  flame of red, the
flicker of  a piercing Eye;  and then the shadows were furled  again and the
terrible vision was removed. The Eye was not  turned to them:  it was gazing
north to where the Captains of  the West  stood at bay, and thither  all its
malice was now bent, as the Power moved to strike its deadly blow; but Frodo
at that dreadful glimpse fell as  one stricken mortally. His hand sought the
chain about his neck.
Sam knelt  by him. Faint, almost  inaudibly, he heard Frodo whispering:
'Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold  my hand! I can't  stop it.' Sam took  his
master's hands and laid  them together, palm to  palm, and kissed them;  and
then he held them gently  between his own. The thought came suddenly to him:
'He's spotted us! It's all  up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is
the end of ends.'
Again  he  lifted Frodo  and drew  his  hands down to  his  own breast.
letting his master's legs  dangle. Then he bowed his  head and struggled off
along the climbing road. It was  not as easy a way to take as it had  looked
at first.  By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great  turmoils
when Sam stood upon  Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern
and
western slopes,  and the road  on  this  side  was not blocked.  Yet in many
places it had crumbled  away or was crossed  by gaping rents. After climbing
eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp  angle  and  went
westward fox  a space. There at the bend it  was  cut deep through a crag of
old weathered  stone once long  ago vomited  from the  Mountain's  furnaces.
Panting under his load Sam turned the bend;  and even  as he did  so, out of
the corner of his  eye, he had a glimpse of something falling from the crag,
like a small piece of black stone that had toppled off as he passed.
A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the backs  of
his hands that still clasped his master's. Then  he knew what had  happened,
for above him as he lay he heard a hated voice.
'Wicked masster!' it hissed. 'Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Smjagol,
gollum   . He musstn't go that  way. He  musstn't hurt  Preciouss. Give  it  to
Smjagol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!'
With a  violent heave Sam rose up.  At once  he drew his  sword; but he
could do nothing.  Gollum and Frodo were locked together. Gollum was tearing
at  his master,  trying to  get at the chain and the Ring. This was probably
the only thing  that could have roused the dying embers of Frodo's heart and
will:  an  attack,  an attempt to wrest his  treasure from him by force.  He
fought back with a sudden  fury  that  amazed Sam, and Gollum  also. Even so
things  might have  gone far  otherwise,  if  Gollum  himself  had  remained
unchanged;  but whatever dreadful paths, lonely and hungry and waterless, he
had trodden, driven by a devouring desire and a terrible fear, they had left
grievous marks on him. He was a lean, starved, haggard thing, all  bones and
tight-drawn sallow skin. A wild light flamed in his eyes, but his malice was
no longer matched by his old griping strength. Frodo flung him off and  rose
up quivering.
'Down,  down!' he gasped,  clutching his hand  to his  breast,  so that
