then he held them gently  between his own. The thought came suddenly to him:
'He's spotted us! It's all  up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is
the end of ends.'
Again  he  lifted Frodo  and drew  his  hands down to  his  own breast.
letting his master's legs  dangle. Then he bowed his  head and struggled off
along the climbing road. It was  not as easy a way to take as it had  looked
at first.  By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great  turmoils
when Sam stood upon  Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern
and
western slopes,  and the road  on  this  side  was not blocked.  Yet in many
places it had crumbled  away or was crossed  by gaping rents. After climbing
eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp  angle  and  went
westward fox  a space. There at the bend it  was  cut deep through a crag of
old weathered  stone once long  ago vomited  from the  Mountain's  furnaces.
Panting under his load Sam turned the bend;  and even  as he did  so, out of
the corner of his  eye, he had a glimpse of something falling from the crag,
like a small piece of black stone that had toppled off as he passed.
A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the backs  of
his hands that still clasped his master's. Then  he knew what had  happened,
for above him as he lay he heard a hated voice.
'Wicked masster!' it hissed. 'Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Smjagol,
gollum   . He musstn't go that  way. He  musstn't hurt  Preciouss. Give  it  to
Smjagol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!'
With a  violent heave Sam rose up.  At once  he drew his  sword; but he
could do nothing.  Gollum and Frodo were locked together. Gollum was tearing
at  his master,  trying to  get at the chain and the Ring. This was probably
the only thing  that could have roused the dying embers of Frodo's heart and
will:  an  attack,  an attempt to wrest his  treasure from him by force.  He
fought back with a sudden  fury  that  amazed Sam, and Gollum  also. Even so
things  might have  gone far  otherwise,  if  Gollum  himself  had  remained
unchanged;  but whatever dreadful paths, lonely and hungry and waterless, he
had trodden, driven by a devouring desire and a terrible fear, they had left
grievous marks on him. He was a lean, starved, haggard thing, all  bones and
tight-drawn sallow skin. A wild light flamed in his eyes, but his malice was
no longer matched by his old griping strength. Frodo flung him off and  rose
up quivering.
'Down,  down!' he gasped,  clutching his hand  to his  breast,  so that
beneath  the cover  of his  leather shirt  he clasped  the Ring.  'Down  you
creeping  thing,  and out of  my path!  Your time is at an  end.  You cannot
betray me or slay me now.'
Then  suddenly, as  before under the eaves of the  Emyn Muil,  Sam  saw
these  two rivals  with other vision. A crouching shape, scarcely  more than
the shadow of a living thing, a creature now wholly ruined and defeated, yet
filled with a hideous lust and rage; and before it stood stern,  untouchable
now by pity, a figure robed  in white, but at its breast it held a  wheel of
fire. Out of the fire there spoke a commanding voice.
'Begone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again,  you shall
be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.'
The crouching  shape  backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and yet
at the same time insatiable desire.
Then the vision  passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on breast, his
breath coming in great gasps,  and Gollum at his feet, resting  on his knees
with his wide-splayed hands upon the ground.
'Look  out!' cried Sam. 'He'll spring!' He stepped forward, brandishing
his  sword. 'Quick, Master!' he gasped. 'Go on! Go on! No time to lose. I'll
deal with him. Go on!'
Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. 'Yes, I must  go on,' he
said. 'Farewell, Sam!  This is the  end at last.  On  Mount  Doom doom shall
fall. Farewell!'  He  turned and went on,  walking slowly  but  erect up the
climbing path.
'Now!' said Sam. 'At last  I can deal with you!' He leaped forward with
drawn blade ready for battle. But  Gollum did not spring. He fell  flat upon
the ground and whimpered.
'Don't kill us,'  he wept. 'Don't hurt us with  nassty cruel steel! Let
us live,  yes,  live just a little longer. Lost lost!  We're lost. And  when
Precious goes we'll die, yes, die into the  dust.' He clawed up the ashes of
the path with his long fleshless fingers. 'Dusst!' he hissed.
Sam's hand wavered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil.
It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many
times deserved;  and also it  seemed the  only safe thing to do. But deep in
his heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike  this
thing  lying  in the  dust, forlorn, ruinous,  utterly wretched. He himself,
though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed
the  agony of  Gollum's  shrivelled  mind and body,  enslaved to that  Ring,
unable  to find peace or relief ever in  life again. But Sam had no words to
express what he felt.
'Oh, curse you, you stinking thing!' he said. 'Go away! Be off! I don't
trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off. Or I              shall  hurt you,
yes, with nasty cruel steel.'
Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces, and then
he turned, and as  Sam aimed a kick at him  he fled away down the  path. Sam
gave no  more heed  to him. He suddenly remembered his master. He looked
up
the  path and could not see him. As fast as he could he trudged up the road.
If he had looked back, he might have seen  not  far below Gollum turn again,
and then with a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come,  swiftly but
warily, creeping on behind, a slinking shadow among the stones.
The  path climbed on.  Soon  it bent again  and. with a  last  eastward
course passed in a cutting along the face of the  cone  and came to the dark
door in the Mountain's side, the door  of the  Sammath  Naur. Far  away  now
rising  towards  the  South the  sun, piercing  the  smokes and haze, burned
ominous, a dull  bleared  disc of red; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain
like a dead land, silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke.
Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and  hot, and a
deep rumbling shook the  air.  'Frodo!  Master!'  he  called. There  was  no
answer. For a  moment he stood, his heart beating with wild fears,  and then
he plunged in. A shadow followed him.
At first he could see nothing. In his great need he drew  out once more
the phial of Galadriel, but it  was pale and cold in  his trembling hand and
threw no light  into that stifling  dark. He was come  to the  heart of  the
realm  of  Sauron  and  the  forges  of  his   ancient  might,  greatest  in
Middle-earth;  all other powers  were here  subdued. Fearfully he took a few
uncertain steps in the dark, and then all at once there came a  flash of red
that leaped upward, and smote the high black roof. Then Sam saw  that he was
in a long cave or tunnel that bored into the  Mountain's  smoking cone.  But
only a short way ahead its floor and the walls on either side were cloven by
a great fissure, out of which the  red glare came, now leaping up, now dying
down  into  darkness; and all the while  far  below there was a rumour and a
trouble as of great engines throbbing and labouring.
The light sprang up  again, and there on the brink of the chasm, at the
very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo,  black against the glare, tense, erect, but
