unable  to find peace or relief ever in  life again. But Sam had no words to
express what he felt.
'Oh, curse you, you stinking thing!' he said. 'Go away! Be off! I don't
trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off. Or I              shall  hurt you,
yes, with nasty cruel steel.'
Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces, and then
he turned, and as  Sam aimed a kick at him  he fled away down the  path. Sam
gave no  more heed  to him. He suddenly remembered his master. He looked
up
the  path and could not see him. As fast as he could he trudged up the road.
If he had looked back, he might have seen  not  far below Gollum turn again,
and then with a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come,  swiftly but
warily, creeping on behind, a slinking shadow among the stones.
The  path climbed on.  Soon  it bent again  and. with a  last  eastward
course passed in a cutting along the face of the  cone  and came to the dark
door in the Mountain's side, the door  of the  Sammath  Naur. Far  away  now
rising  towards  the  South the  sun, piercing  the  smokes and haze, burned
ominous, a dull  bleared  disc of red; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain
like a dead land, silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke.
Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and  hot, and a
deep rumbling shook the  air.  'Frodo!  Master!'  he  called. There  was  no
answer. For a  moment he stood, his heart beating with wild fears,  and then
he plunged in. A shadow followed him.
At first he could see nothing. In his great need he drew  out once more
the phial of Galadriel, but it  was pale and cold in  his trembling hand and
threw no light  into that stifling  dark. He was come  to the  heart of  the
realm  of  Sauron  and  the  forges  of  his   ancient  might,  greatest  in
Middle-earth;  all other powers  were here  subdued. Fearfully he took a few
uncertain steps in the dark, and then all at once there came a  flash of red
that leaped upward, and smote the high black roof. Then Sam saw  that he was
in a long cave or tunnel that bored into the  Mountain's  smoking cone.  But
only a short way ahead its floor and the walls on either side were cloven by
a great fissure, out of which the  red glare came, now leaping up, now dying
down  into  darkness; and all the while  far  below there was a rumour and a
trouble as of great engines throbbing and labouring.
The light sprang up  again, and there on the brink of the chasm, at the
very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo,  black against the glare, tense, erect, but
still as if he had been turned to stone.
'Master!' cried Sam.
Then Frodo stirred  and  spoke with a  clear voice, indeed with a voice
clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard him use, and it rose above
the throb and turmoil of Mount Doom, ringing in the roof and walls.
'I have come,' he said. 'But I  do not choose now to do what I  came to
do. I will not do this  deed. The Ring is mine!' And suddenly, as he set  it
on  his finger,  he  vanished  from Sam's sight.  Sam gasped,  but he had no
chance to cry out, for at that moment many things happened.
Something struck Sam violently in the back,  his legs were knocked from
under him and he was flung aside, striking his head against the stony floor,
as a dark shape sprang  over him. He  lay still  and for a  moment  all went
black.
And far away, as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his own, even
in  Sammath Naur the  very heart  of his realm, the Power  in  Barad-dyr was
shaken, and the Tower trembled from its foundations to its  proud and bitter
crown.  The  Dark Lord was suddenly  aware of him, and  his Eye piercing all
shadows  looked  across the plain to  the door  that he had  made;  and  the
magnitude of  his own folly was revealed to him in a blinding flash, and all
the devices of his enemies were at last laid bare.  Then his wrath blazed in
consuming flame, but his fear rose like a vast black smoke to choke him. For
he knew his deadly peril and the thread upon which his doom now hung.
From all his policies and  webs of  fear  and treachery, from  all  his
stratagems and wars his mind shook  free; and throughout his realm  a tremor
ran, his slaves quailed, and his armies  halted,  and his captains  suddenly
steerless,  bereft of will, wavered and  despaired. For they were forgotten.
The whole mind and purpose of the Power that wielded them was now bent
with
overwhelming  force  upon  the Mountain.  At his  summons,  wheeling with  a
rending cry, in a last desperate race there flew, faster than the winds, the
Nazgyl the Ringwraiths, and with a storm of wings they hurtled southwards to
Mount Doom.
Sam got up. He was dazed,  and blood streaming from his head dripped in
his eyes. He groped  forward, and then  he saw a strange and terrible thing.
Gollum on the edge of the abyss was fighting like a mad thing with an unseen
foe. To and fro he swayed, now  so near the brink that almost he tumbled in,
now dragging back, falling to the ground, rising, and falling again. And all
the while he hissed but spoke no words.
The fires below  awoke in  anger,  the  red  light  blazed, and all the
cavern was  filled with  a great glare  and heat. Suddenly  Sam saw Gollum's
long hands  draw  upwards  to  his mouth; his white fangs gleamed,  and then
snapped as  they bit. Frodo  gave a cry, and there he was, fallen  upon  his
knees at the chasm's edge. But Gollum, dancing  like a mad thing, held aloft
the ring, a finger still thrust within its circle. It shone now as if verily
it was wrought of living fire.
'Precious,  precious,  precious!'  Gollum  cried. 'My  Precious!  O  my
Precious!'  And with that, even as his eyes were lifted  up to gloat  on his
prize, he  stepped  too far, toppled, wavered for a moment on the brink, and
then  with a shriek he fell. Out of the depths came  his last wail                Precious   ,
and he was gone.
There was a roar  and a great confusion  of noise. Fires leaped  up and
licked the  roof.  The throbbing  grew to a great tumult,  and the  Mountain
shook. Sam ran to Frodo and picked him up and carried him. out to the  door.
And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains
of Mordor, such wonder and terror came on him that he stood still forgetting
all else, and gazed as one turned to stone.
A brief vision he had of  swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers
and battlements, tall as  hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above
immeasurable pits;  great  courts and  dungeons, eyeless  prisons  sheer  as
cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant: and then  all passed.  Towers
fell  and  mountains slid;  walls crumbled and melted,  crashing down;  vast
spires  of  smoke and  spouting  steams  went  billowing  up, up, until they
toppled  like  an overwhelming  wave, and  its  wild  crest  curled and came
foaming down  upon the land. And then at last  over  the miles between there
came a rumble, rising to a deafening  crash  and roar;  the earth shook, the
plain heaved and  cracked, and Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its  riven
summit.  The  skies  burst  into  thunder seared  with lightning. Down  like
lashing whips fell a torrent of black rain. And into the heart of the storm,
with a cry that pierced all  other  sounds, tearing the clouds asunder,  the
Nazgyl came, shooting  like  flaming bolts, as  caught in the  fiery ruin of
hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out.
'Well,  this  is the end, Sam Gamgee,'  said a  voice by his side.  And
there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes there
was peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor any fear. His burden
