the while he hissed but spoke no words.
The fires below  awoke in  anger,  the  red  light  blazed, and all the
cavern was  filled with  a great glare  and heat. Suddenly  Sam saw Gollum's
long hands  draw  upwards  to  his mouth; his white fangs gleamed,  and then
snapped as  they bit. Frodo  gave a cry, and there he was, fallen  upon  his
knees at the chasm's edge. But Gollum, dancing  like a mad thing, held aloft
the ring, a finger still thrust within its circle. It shone now as if verily
it was wrought of living fire.
'Precious,  precious,  precious!'  Gollum  cried. 'My  Precious!  O  my
Precious!'  And with that, even as his eyes were lifted  up to gloat  on his
prize, he  stepped  too far, toppled, wavered for a moment on the brink, and
then  with a shriek he fell. Out of the depths came  his last wail                Precious   ,
and he was gone.
There was a roar  and a great confusion  of noise. Fires leaped  up and
licked the  roof.  The throbbing  grew to a great tumult,  and the  Mountain
shook. Sam ran to Frodo and picked him up and carried him. out to the  door.
And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains
of Mordor, such wonder and terror came on him that he stood still forgetting
all else, and gazed as one turned to stone.
A brief vision he had of  swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers
and battlements, tall as  hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above
immeasurable pits;  great  courts and  dungeons, eyeless  prisons  sheer  as
cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant: and then  all passed.  Towers
fell  and  mountains slid;  walls crumbled and melted,  crashing down;  vast
spires  of  smoke and  spouting  steams  went  billowing  up, up, until they
toppled  like  an overwhelming  wave, and  its  wild  crest  curled and came
foaming down  upon the land. And then at last  over  the miles between there
came a rumble, rising to a deafening  crash  and roar;  the earth shook, the
plain heaved and  cracked, and Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its  riven
summit.  The  skies  burst  into  thunder seared  with lightning. Down  like
lashing whips fell a torrent of black rain. And into the heart of the storm,
with a cry that pierced all  other  sounds, tearing the clouds asunder,  the
Nazgyl came, shooting  like  flaming bolts, as  caught in the  fiery ruin of
hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out.
'Well,  this  is the end, Sam Gamgee,'  said a  voice by his side.  And
there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes there
was peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor any fear. His burden
was taken away. There was the dear master of the sweet days in the Shire.
'Master!' cried  Sam. and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin  of the
world for the moment he  felt only joy, great joy. The burden  was gone. His
master had  been  saved;  he was  himself again, he was free. And  then  Sam
caught sight of the maimed and bleeding hand.
'Your poor hand!'  he said.  'And I have nothing to  bind it  with,  or
comfort it.  I would have  spared him  a whole hand of mine rather. But he's
gone now beyond recall, gone for ever.'
'Yes,'  said Frodo. 'But do  you remember Gandalf's words:                 Even  Gollum
may  have something  yet to do?           But for him, Sam, I could not have destroyed
the Ring. The Quest would  have been in vain, even at the bitter end. So let
us forgive  him!  For the Quest  is achieved, and now all is over. I am glad
you are here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam.'
Chapter 4. The Field of Cormallen
All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the West
were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and under the wings
of the Nazgyl  the shadows of death fell dark upon the earth. Aragorn  stood
beneath his banner,  silent and stern, as one lost in thought of things long
past or far away; but his eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as
the  night deepens.  Upon the hill-top stood Gandalf,  and  he was white and
cold and no shadow fell on him. The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on
the beleaguered hills,  voices roaring like a tide amid the  wreck and crash
of arms.
As  if to his eyes some sudden vision had  been given, Gandalf stirred;
and  he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale and clear. Then
he lifted up his hands and cried in  a loud voice ringing above the din:                  The
Eagles are coming!        And many voices answered crying:               The  Eagles are
coming!
The Eagles are  coming!          The hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what
this
sign might mean.
There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of
all the Eagles of  the North, mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor,
who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the  Encircling  Mountains
when Middle-earth was young. Behind  them in long swift lines came all their
vassals  from the northern mountains, speeding on a gathering wind. Straight
down  upon the Nazgyl they bore, stooping suddenly out of the high airs, and
the rush of their wide wings as they passed over was like a gale.
But the  Nazgyl  turned and  fled, and vanished into  Mordor's shadows,
hearing  a sudden terrible  call  out of the  Dark Tower; and  even  at that
moment  all the hosts of Mordor trembled, doubt clutched their hearts, their
laughter  failed, their hands shook  and their limbs were loosed.  The Power
that drove them on and filled them with hate and fury was wavering, its will
was removed from them; and now looking in the eyes of their enemies they
saw
a deadly light and were afraid.
