Chapter 4. The Field of Cormallen
All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the West
were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and under the wings
of the Nazgyl  the shadows of death fell dark upon the earth. Aragorn  stood
beneath his banner,  silent and stern, as one lost in thought of things long
past or far away; but his eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as
the  night deepens.  Upon the hill-top stood Gandalf,  and  he was white and
cold and no shadow fell on him. The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on
the beleaguered hills,  voices roaring like a tide amid the  wreck and crash
of arms.
As  if to his eyes some sudden vision had  been given, Gandalf stirred;
and  he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale and clear. Then
he lifted up his hands and cried in  a loud voice ringing above the din:                  The
Eagles are coming!        And many voices answered crying:               The  Eagles are
coming!
The Eagles are  coming!          The hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what
this
sign might mean.
There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of
all the Eagles of  the North, mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor,
who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the  Encircling  Mountains
when Middle-earth was young. Behind  them in long swift lines came all their
vassals  from the northern mountains, speeding on a gathering wind. Straight
down  upon the Nazgyl they bore, stooping suddenly out of the high airs, and
the rush of their wide wings as they passed over was like a gale.
But the  Nazgyl  turned and  fled, and vanished into  Mordor's shadows,
hearing  a sudden terrible  call  out of the  Dark Tower; and  even  at that
moment  all the hosts of Mordor trembled, doubt clutched their hearts, their
laughter  failed, their hands shook  and their limbs were loosed.  The Power
that drove them on and filled them with hate and fury was wavering, its will
was removed from them; and now looking in the eyes of their enemies they
saw
a deadly light and were afraid.
Then all the Captains  of  the West cried aloud, for their hearts  were
filled  with a  new hope in the midst of darkness. Out  from the beleaguered
hills   knights  of   Gondor,  Riders  of  Rohan,  D®nedain  of  the  North,
close-serried  companies, drove against  their wavering  foes, piercing  the
press with the thrust of bitter spears. But  Gandalf lifted up his arms  and
called once more in a clear voice:
'Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom.'
And even  as he spoke  the earth rocked beneath their feet. Then rising
swiftly  up,  far  above the  Towers  of  the  Black  Gate, high  above  the
mountains,  a vast soaring  darkness  sprang into the sky,  flickering  with
fire. The  earth  groaned  and quaked.  The  Towers  of  the  Teeth  swayed,
tottered, and fell down; the mighty rampart  crumbled;  the Black  Gate  was
hurled in ruin; and from far away, now dim, now growing, now mounting to
the
clouds, there came a drumming rumble, a roar, a long echoing roll of ruinous
noise.
'The  realm of  Sauron is ended!'  said  Gandalf.  'The Ring-bearer has
fulfilled his Quest.' And as the Captains gazed south to the Land of Mordor,
it seemed to them that, black  against  the pall of cloud, there rose a huge
shape of shadow,  impenetrable,  lightning-crowned,  filling  all  the  sky.
Enormous it reared above the world,  and stretched  out towards  them a vast
threatening hand, terrible but  impotent: for even as it leaned over them, a
great wind took it, and  it was  all blown away, and passed; and then a hush
fell.
The Captains  bowed their heads; and when they looked up again, behold!
their enemies were flying and  the power of Mordor was scattering  like dust
in the wind. As when death  smites the swollen brooding thing  that inhabits
their crawling hill and holds them all in sway, ants will wander witless and
purposeless and then feebly die, so the creatures of Sauron, orc or troll or
beast  spell-enslaved,  ran  hither  and  thither  mindless;  and  some slew
themselves, or  cast themselves  in pits,  or  fled wailing  back to hide in
holes and dark lightless  places far  from hope. But the Men of  Rhyn and of
Harad, Easterling and  Southron, saw  the ruin of their war  and  the  great
majesty and glory  of the Captains of the West. And those  that were deepest
and longest in evil servitude,  hating the West, and yet were men  proud and
bold,  in their turn now gathered  themselves for a  last stand of desperate
battle. But the most part fled eastward  as  they could; and some cast their
weapons down and sued for mercy.
Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn
and the  other  lords, stood  upon the hill-top  and called; and down to him
came the great eagle, Gwaihir the Windlord, and stood before him.
'Twice you have  borne me,  Gwaihir my friend,'  said  Gandalf. 'Thrice
shall pay for all, if you  are willing. You will  not find  me a burden much
greater than when  you bore me from  Zirak-zigil, where  my  old life burned
away.'
'I would  bear you,' answered Gwaihir, 'whither you will, even were you
made of stone.'
'Then  come, and let your  brother go with us,  and some other of  your
folk who is most  swift! For we have need of  speed greater than  any  wind,
outmatching the wings of the Nazgyl.'
'The North  Wind blows, but we  shall outfly it,' said Gwaihir. And  he
lifted up Gandalf and  sped away south, and  with  him  went Landroval,  and
Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over  Udyn and  Gorgoroth  and
saw
all  the land in  ruin and tumult  beneath them, and before them Mount  Doom
blazing, pouring out its fire.
'I am glad that you are here with me,' said Frodo. 'Here at the end  of
all things, Sam.'
'Yes, I  am with  you, Master,' said Sam, laying  Frodo's  wounded hand
gently to his breast. 'And you're with me.  And  the journey's finished. But
after  coming all that way I don't  want to give  up  yet. It's not like me,
somehow, if you understand.'
'Maybe not, Sam,' said Frodo; 'but  it's like things  are in the world.
Hopes fail. An end comes.  We have only  a little  time to wait  now. We are
lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.'
'Well,  Master, we could at  least go further from this dangerous place
here, from this Crack of Doom,  if  that's its name. Now couldn't  we? Come,
Mr. Frodo, let's go down the path at any rate!'
'Very  well,  Sam. If you wish to go, I'll come,' said  Frodo; and they
rose and went slowly down the  winding road; and even as they passed towards
the  Mountain's  quaking  feet, a  great smoke and steam  belched  from  the
Sammath Naur, and the side  of  the cone was riven open,  and  a  huge fiery
vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side.
Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind and body
