weapons down and sued for mercy.
Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn
and the  other  lords, stood  upon the hill-top  and called; and down to him
came the great eagle, Gwaihir the Windlord, and stood before him.
'Twice you have  borne me,  Gwaihir my friend,'  said  Gandalf. 'Thrice
shall pay for all, if you  are willing. You will  not find  me a burden much
greater than when  you bore me from  Zirak-zigil, where  my  old life burned
away.'
'I would  bear you,' answered Gwaihir, 'whither you will, even were you
made of stone.'
'Then  come, and let your  brother go with us,  and some other of  your
folk who is most  swift! For we have need of  speed greater than  any  wind,
outmatching the wings of the Nazgyl.'
'The North  Wind blows, but we  shall outfly it,' said Gwaihir. And  he
lifted up Gandalf and  sped away south, and  with  him  went Landroval,  and
Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over  Udyn and  Gorgoroth  and
saw
all  the land in  ruin and tumult  beneath them, and before them Mount  Doom
blazing, pouring out its fire.
'I am glad that you are here with me,' said Frodo. 'Here at the end  of
all things, Sam.'
'Yes, I  am with  you, Master,' said Sam, laying  Frodo's  wounded hand
gently to his breast. 'And you're with me.  And  the journey's finished. But
after  coming all that way I don't  want to give  up  yet. It's not like me,
somehow, if you understand.'
'Maybe not, Sam,' said Frodo; 'but  it's like things  are in the world.
Hopes fail. An end comes.  We have only  a little  time to wait  now. We are
lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.'
'Well,  Master, we could at  least go further from this dangerous place
here, from this Crack of Doom,  if  that's its name. Now couldn't  we? Come,
Mr. Frodo, let's go down the path at any rate!'
'Very  well,  Sam. If you wish to go, I'll come,' said  Frodo; and they
rose and went slowly down the  winding road; and even as they passed towards
the  Mountain's  quaking  feet, a  great smoke and steam  belched  from  the
Sammath Naur, and the side  of  the cone was riven open,  and  a  huge fiery
vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side.
Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind and body
was  swiftly  ebbing.  They  had  reached  a low ashen  hill  piled  at  the
Mountain's foot; but from it there was no more escape. It was an island now,
not long to  endure, amid the torment  of Orodruin. All about  it the  earth
gaped, and from  deep rifts and pits smoke and fumes leaped up. Behind  them
the Mountain was  convulsed. Great rents opened in  its side. Slow rivers of
fire came down the  long slopes towards them. Soon they would be engulfed. A
rain of hot ash was falling.
They stood now; and Sam still holding his master's hand caressed it. He
sighed. 'What a  tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven't  we?' he said.  'I
wish I could hear it told! Do you think they'll say:              Now comes the story of
Nine-fingered Frodo and the Ring of Doom?                 And then everyone  will hush, like
we  did,  when  in Rivendell they told us the tale of Beren One-hand and the
Great Jewel. I wish I could hear  it!  And I wonder how it will go on  after
our part.'
But even while he spoke  so, to keep fear away until the very last, his
eyes still strayed north,  north  into the eye of the wind, to where the sky
far off was  clear,  as the cold  blast, rising to  a  gale, drove  back the
darkness and the ruin of the clouds.
And so  it was that Gwaihir  saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes, as
down  the  wild  wind he came,  and  daring the great peril of the skies  he
circled in  the  air: two small dark figures,  forlorn, hand  in hand upon a
little  hill, while the  world  shook under them, and  gasped, and rivers of
fire drew near. And even as  he  espied them and came swooping down, he
saw
them  fall, worn out,  or  choked  with  fumes and heat, or stricken down by
despair at last, hiding their eyes from death.
Side by side they lay; and  down swept Gwaihir, and down came Landroval
and  Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not  knowing what fate had befallen
them,  the wanderers were  lifted up and borne far away  out of the darkness
and the fire.
When Sam awoke, he found that he  was lying on some soft bed, but  over
him  gently swayed wide  beechen boughs,  and  through  their  young  leaves
sunlight glimmered, green and gold. All the  air was full of a sweet mingled
scent.
He  remembered that smell: the  fragrance  of Ithilien. 'Bless  me!' he
mused. 'How long have I been  asleep?' For the  scent had borne  him back to
the day when he  had  lit  his little  fire under  the sunny bank; and for a
moment all else  between was out of  waking  memory. He stretched and drew
a
deep breath. 'Why, what a dream I've had!' he muttered. 'I am glad to wake!'
He sat  up and then he  saw  that  Frodo  was  lying  beside  him, and slept
peacefully,  one  hand  behind  his  head, and  the other  resting  upon the
coverlet. It was the right hand, and the third finger was missing.
Full memory flooded back, and Sam cried aloud: 'It wasn't a dream! Then
where are we?'
And a  voice spoke softly behind:  'In the land of Ithilien, and in the
keeping of the King; and he awaits you.' With that Gandalf stood before him,
robed in white, his beard now  gleaming like  pure snow in  the twinkling of
the leafy sunlight. 'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?' he said.
But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment, between
bewilderment  and great  joy,  he  could  not  answer.  At  last  he gasped:
'Gandalf! I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was  dead myself. Is
everything sad going to come untrue? What's happened to the world?'
'A great Shadow  has departed,' said  Gandalf, and then he  laughed and
the  sound was like music,  or  like  water in  a  parched land; and  as  he
listened  the thought came to  Sam  that he had not heard laughter, the pure
sound of merriment, for days upon days without count.  It fell upon his ears
like  the echo of all the joys he had ever  known. But he himself burst into
tears. Then, as a  sweet rain will pass down a wind of  spring  and the  sun
will shine out the  clearer, his  tears  ceased, and his laughter welled up,
and laughing he sprang from his bed.
'How do I feel?' he cried. 'Well, I don't know how to say it. I feel, I
feel' - he waved his arms in the air - 'I feel like spring after winter, and
sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs I have ever
heard!' He stopped and he turned towards his  master. 'But how's Mr. Frodo?'
he said. 'Isn't it a shame about  his poor hand? But  I hope he's all  right
otherwise. He's had a cruel time.'
'Yes, I am all right otherwise,' said Frodo, sitting up and laughing in
his turn. I fell asleep again waiting  for  you, Sam,  you sleepyhead. I was
awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.'
'Noon?' said Sam, trying to calculate. 'Noon of what day?'
'The fourteenth  of the New Year,' said Gandalf; 'or  if you like,  the
eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning.( But in Gondor the New Year will
