by the hobbits one Gross, though  the  word was not considered proper to use
of people); and  the  guests were selected  from  all  the families to which
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with  the addition of a  few special unrelated
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits  were included, and present by
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in  the
matter  of  sitting up late,  especially when there  was a chance of getting
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.
There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and also  many  Tooks  and
Brandybucks;  there  were  various  Grubbs   (relations  of  Bilbo  Baggins'
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and a
selection  of  Burrowses,  Bolgers, Bracegirdles,  Brockhouses,  Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly
connected
with Bilbo, and  some of them  had hardly ever  been in Hobbiton before,  as
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses  were not
forgotten.  Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo  and
detested Frodo,  but  so magnificent  was the invitation  card,  written  in
golden ink, that  they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides,  their
cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing  in  food for many years and  his table
had a high reputation.
All  the  one hundred  and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast;
though they  rather  dreaded  the  after-dinner  speech  of their  host  (an
inevitable item). He was liable to drag  in bits of  what he  called poetry;
and sometimes, after  a glass or two, would  allude to the absurd adventures
of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a                      very
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied,
and prolonged. The  purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had  depleted the
stocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not
matter much.
After  the feast (more or less) came the  Speech. Most of  the  company
were, however, now in a tolerant  mood, at that  delightful stage which they
called 'filling up  the corners'.  They were sipping their favourite drinks,
and nibbling at  their favourite  dainties, and their fears  were forgotten.
They were prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop.
My dear People,     began Bilbo, rising in  his  place. 'Hear! Hear! Hear!'
they shouted,  and  kept on repeating  it  in chorus,  seeming  reluctant to
follow their own advice. Bilbo left  his place and went and stood on a chair
under the illuminated  tree. The  light of the lanterns fell on his  beaming
face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could
all see  him standing,  waving  one hand in  the air,  the other  was in his
trouser-pocket.
My dear Bagginses and Boffins,          he began again;      and my  dear  Tooks and
Brandybucks, and Grubbs,  and  Chubbs,  and Burrowses,  and Hornblowers,
and
Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots.
'ProudFEET!'
shouted  an  elderly  hobbit  from  the back  of the pavilion.  His name, of
course, was  Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally
furry, and both were on the table.
Proudfoots,    repeated Bilbo.     Also my  good  Sackville-Bagginses that  I
welcome  back at last  to  Bag  End. Today  is my  one  hundred and eleventh
birthday: I am eleventy-one  today!           'Hurray!  Hurray! Many  Happy  Returns!'
they  shouted, and they  hammered  joyously  on the tables.  Bilbo was doing
splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.
/  hope you  are  all  enjoying yourselves as much as  I  am.               Deafening
cheers. Cries  of     Yes    (and   No).  Noises  of trumpets and horns, pipes  and
flutes,  and  other musical instruments.  There were, as has been said, many
young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of
them bore the  mark DALE  on them; which did not  convey much to most of
the
hobbits, but they all agreed they were  marvellous crackers.  They contained
instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one
corner some of  the young Tooks and  Brandybucks, supposing Uncle  Bilbo  to
have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up
an impromptu orchestra, and began a  merry dance-tune.  Master  Everard Took
and  Miss Melilot Brandybuck  got on a  table  and with bells in their hands
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous.
But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, he
blew  three loud  hoots. The noise subsided. /              shall not keep you  long,       he
cried. Cheers from all the assembly. /           have called  you all  together for a
Purpose.     Something in  the way  that he said this made an impression.  There
was almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears.
Indeed,  for  Three  Purposes! First of  all,  to  tell  you that  I am
immensely fond  of  you all, and that eleventy-one years is too short a time
to live among such  excellent and  admirable hobbits.                 Tremendous outburst of
approval.
/  don't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less
than half of you half as well as you deserve.            This was unexpected and rather
difficult. There  was some scattered clapping, but most of  them were trying
to work it out and see if it came to a compliment.
Secondly,  to  celebrate my birthday.          Cheers again.  /    should say: OUR
birthday.  For it  is, of  course, also the birthday of my  heir and nephew,
Frodo.  He comes  of  age  and into his inheritance today.                 Some  perfunctory
clapping by the  elders;  and some loud  shouts of 'Frodo!  Frodo! Jolly old
Frodo,' from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what
was  meant by 'coming  into his inheritance'.             Together we score one  hundred
and forty-four.  Your numbers were chosen to  fit this remarkable total: One
Gross, if I may use the  expression.          No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of
his guests, and especially  the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted,  feeling
sure they had only been asked to fill up the  required number, like goods in
a package. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.'
It is also,  if  I  may be  allowed to  refer to  ancient history,  the
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the
fact that it was    my   birthday slipped  my memory on that occasion. I was only
fifty-one  then,  and birthdays did  not seem so important.  The banquet was
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and
could only say 'thag you very  buch'. I now repeat  it more correctly: Thank
you  very  much for coming  to my little party.             Obstinate  silence. They all
feared that  a song or some poetry was now imminent;  and they  were getting
bored. Why couldn't he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo
did not sing or recite. He paused for a moment.
Thirdly and finally,    he said,   I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT.                    He
spoke
this last word so  loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could.
I regret to announce that - though, as I said, eleventy-one years is far too
short a time to spend among you - this is the END. I am going. I  am leaving
NOW. GOOD-BYE!
He stepped down and  vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and
the guests  all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be
seen. One hundred  and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.
