soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.' 'Good-bye!' they cried, and
rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel.
It  was  dark and  damp. At the far  end it  was  closed  by  a gate of
thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had
all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock
clicked. The sound was ominous.
'There!' said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and
on the edge of the Old Forest.'
'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin.
'I don't know what  stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the
old bogey-stories Fatty's nurses  used to tell him, about goblins and wolves
and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I  don't believe them.
is
But the  Forest   queer. Everything in it  is very  much more  alive,  more
aware of what is going on, so to  speak, than things  are in the  Shire. And
the  trees do not like strangers. They watch  you. They  are usually content
merely to  watch  you,  as  long  as  daylight  lasts,  and  don't  do much.
Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a  branch,  or  stick  a root
out,  or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at  night things  can be most
alarming,  or so I am  told. I have  only once or twice  been in here  after
dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the  trees were whispering
to each  other,  passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language;
and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They  do  say the trees
do  actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In  fact long
ago they  attacked the Hedge: they came and  planted themselves right by it,
and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and
made a great  bonfire in the  Forest, and  burned all the  ground in  a long
strip east of the Hedge. After that the  trees gave up the attack,  but they
became very unfriendly.  There  is  still a wide  bare  space not far inside
where the bonfire was made.'
'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin.
'There are  various queer things living deep  in the Forest, and on the
far  side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never  seen
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever  one comes inside one
finds
open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time  to time in a queer
fashion.  Not far from  this tunnel there is, or was for  a  long time,  the
beginning of quite  a broad path leading to the Bonfire  Glade,  and then on
more  or less in our direction, east and a little  north. That is the path I
am going to try and find.'
The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across  the  wide hollow.
On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a
hundred yards and more beyond  the Hedge;  but it  vanished  as  soon as  it
brought them under the trees.  Looking back they could see the  dark line of
the  Hedge  through  the stems of trees  that were already thick about them.
Looking  ahead  they  could  see  only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes  and
shapes: straight  or bent,  twisted, leaning,  squat  or slender, smooth  or
gnarled and branched;  and all the stems were green  or grey with  moss  and
slimy, shaggy growths.
Merry alone  seemed fairly cheerful. 'You had  better lead  on and find
that path,'  Frodo  said to him.  'Don't  let us lose one another, or forget
which way the Hedge lies!'
They picked a  way  among the trees, and  their  ponies plodded  along,
carefully  avoiding the many  writhing  and interlacing roots. There  was no
undergrowth. The ground was  rising  steadily,  and as they went  forward it
seemed  that the trees became  taller, darker,  and  thicker. There  was  no
sound,  except  an occasional drip  of  moisture falling  through  the still
leaves.  For  the  moment  there  was no  whispering  or movement  among the
branches; but  they  all got  an uncomfortable feeling that they were  being
watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity.  The feeling
steadily  grew, until they found  themselves looking up quickly, or glancing
back over their shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow.
There was not  as  yet  any  sign  of  a path,  and  the  trees  seemed
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly  felt that he could not bear it
any longer, and without warning let out  a shout. 'Oi! Oi!' he  cried. 'I am
not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!'
The others halted startled; but the  cry  fell as if muffled by a heavy
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood  seemed to  become
more
crowded and more watchful than before.
'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than
good.'
Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, and if
he had been right  to make  the others come into this abominable wood. Merry
was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go.
Pippin noticed it. 'It  has not taken you long to lose  us,' he said. But at
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead.
'Well, well!'  he  said. 'These trees      do    shift.  There is the  Bonfire
Glade in front of  us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved
away!'
The light grew clearer as they  went forward. Suddenly they came out of
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above
them, blue and clear to  their surprise, for down under the Forest-roof they
had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The
sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet to shine down into the clearing,
though its light was on  the  tree-tops. The  leaves  were  all  thicker and
greener about  the edges of  the  glade, enclosing  it with  an almost solid
wall. No tree grew there, only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky  and
faded hemlocks  and wood-parsley,  fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes,  and
rampant nettles and  thistles.  A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and
cheerful garden after the close Forest.
The hobbits  felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening
daylight in the  sky. At the far side  of the glade there was a break in the
wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on into
the wood, wide  in places  and open  above, though  every  now and again the
trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path  they
rode. They were  still climbing gently, but they now  went much quicker, and
with better heart;  for it seemed to them that the  Forest had relented, and
was going to let them pass unhindered after all.
But after a while the air began to get  hot and stuffy. The  trees drew
close again  on either side, and they  could  no longer  see far ahead.  Now
stronger than ever they  felt again  the ill will  of  the  wood pressing on
them.  So silent was it that  the fall of their ponies'  hoofs, rustling  on
dead leaves and  occasionally  stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud  in
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank
to a murmur.
O! Wanderers in the shadowed land
despair not! For though dark they stand,
all woods there be must end at last,
and see the open sun go past:
the setting sun, the rising sun,
the day's end, or the day begun.
