the day when he  had  lit  his little  fire under  the sunny bank; and for a
moment all else  between was out of  waking  memory. He stretched and drew
a
deep breath. 'Why, what a dream I've had!' he muttered. 'I am glad to wake!'
He sat  up and then he  saw  that  Frodo  was  lying  beside  him, and slept
peacefully,  one  hand  behind  his  head, and  the other  resting  upon the
coverlet. It was the right hand, and the third finger was missing.
Full memory flooded back, and Sam cried aloud: 'It wasn't a dream! Then
where are we?'
And a  voice spoke softly behind:  'In the land of Ithilien, and in the
keeping of the King; and he awaits you.' With that Gandalf stood before him,
robed in white, his beard now  gleaming like  pure snow in  the twinkling of
the leafy sunlight. 'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?' he said.
But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment, between
bewilderment  and great  joy,  he  could  not  answer.  At  last  he gasped:
'Gandalf! I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was  dead myself. Is
everything sad going to come untrue? What's happened to the world?'
'A great Shadow  has departed,' said  Gandalf, and then he  laughed and
the  sound was like music,  or  like  water in  a  parched land; and  as  he
listened  the thought came to  Sam  that he had not heard laughter, the pure
sound of merriment, for days upon days without count.  It fell upon his ears
like  the echo of all the joys he had ever  known. But he himself burst into
tears. Then, as a  sweet rain will pass down a wind of  spring  and the  sun
will shine out the  clearer, his  tears  ceased, and his laughter welled up,
and laughing he sprang from his bed.
'How do I feel?' he cried. 'Well, I don't know how to say it. I feel, I
feel' - he waved his arms in the air - 'I feel like spring after winter, and
sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs I have ever
heard!' He stopped and he turned towards his  master. 'But how's Mr. Frodo?'
he said. 'Isn't it a shame about  his poor hand? But  I hope he's all  right
otherwise. He's had a cruel time.'
'Yes, I am all right otherwise,' said Frodo, sitting up and laughing in
his turn. I fell asleep again waiting  for  you, Sam,  you sleepyhead. I was
awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.'
'Noon?' said Sam, trying to calculate. 'Noon of what day?'
'The fourteenth  of the New Year,' said Gandalf; 'or  if you like,  the
eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning.( But in Gondor the New Year will
always now begin upon  the twenty-fifth  of March when Sauron fell, and when
you were brought out of the fire to the King. He has  tended you, and now he
awaits you. You shall eat and drink with him. When you are ready I will lead
you to him.'
'The King?' said Sam. 'What king, and who is he?'
'The King of Gondor and Lord  of the Western Lands,' said  Gandalf 'and
he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon  to his crowning,
but he waits for you.'
'What shall  we  wear?' said Sam; for all he could  see was the old and
tattered clothes that  they  had journeyed  in, lying  folded  on the ground
beside their beds.
'The clothes that you wore on your way  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Even
the orc-rags that you bore in the black land;  Frodo, shall be preserved. No
silks  and linens, nor any armour or heraldry  could be more honourable. But
later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.'
Then he held out his hands to  them, and they  saw that one shone  with
light. 'What have you got there?' Frodo cried. 'Can it be - ?'
'Yes, I  have brought your two treasures.  They  were found on Sam when
you were rescued.  The  Lady Galadriel's gifts: your glass,  Frodo, and your
box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.'
When they were washed and clad, and had eaten a light meal, the Hobbits
followed  Gandalf.  They  stepped out of  the beech-grove in which  they had
lain, and passed on to  a long green  lawn, glowing in sunshine, bordered by
stately dark-leaved trees laden with scarlet blossom. Behind them they could
hear the  sound of falling water, and a stream  ran down before them between
flowering banks, until it came to a greenwood at the lawn's foot and  passed
then on under an archway of trees, through  which they saw  the  shimmer  of
water far away.
As they  came  to the opening in the wood, they were surprised  to  see
knights in bright mail and tall  guards in silver and black  standing there,
who greeted them with honour and bowed before them. And then one blew a
long
trumpet, and  they  went on through the  aisle of trees  beside  the singing
stream. So they came  to  a wide green land, and beyond it was a broad river
in a silver haze, out of which rose  a  long wooded isle, and many ships lay
by its shores. But on the field where they now stood  a great host was drawn
up,  in  ranks  and  companies glittering  in  the  sun.  And as the Hobbits
approached swords were  unsheathed, and  spears  were  shaken, and horns and
trumpets sang, and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:
'Long live the Halflings! Praise them with great praise!
Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar'ni Pheriannath!
Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise!
Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annyn! Eglerio!
Praise them!
Eglerio!
A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet!
Praise them!
Cormacolindor, a laita tbrienna!
Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!'
And  so the  red blood blushing in their faces  and their eyes  shining
with wonder, Frodo  and Sam went forward  and saw  that amidst the
clamorous
host were set three high-seats  built of green turves. Behind the seat  upon
the right floated, white on green, a great horse running free; upon the left
was a banner, silver upon  blue, a ship swan-prowed faring on  the sea;  but
behind the highest throne in the midst of all a great standard was spread in
the  breeze,  and there a white  tree flowered upon a sable  field beneath a
shining crown and seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man,
a great sword was laid  across his knees, but he wore no  helm. As they drew
near he rose. And then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of
face, kingly, lord of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey.
Frodo  ran to meet  him, and Sam  followed close behind. 'Well, if that
isn't the crown of all!' he said. 'Strider, or I'm still asleep!'
'Yes, Sam, Strider,'  said Aragorn. 'It is a long way, is  it not, from
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours
has been the darkest road.'
And then to Sam's surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee before
them; and taking them by the hand,  Frodo upon  his  right and Sam upon  his
left, he led them to the throne, and  setting them upon it, he turned to the
men and captains who stood by and spoke, so that his voice rang over all the
host, crying:
'Praise them with great praise!'
And  when  the glad shout had swelled up and died away  again, to Sam's
final and  complete satisfaction  and pure joy, a  minstrel of Gondor  stood
