approached swords were  unsheathed, and  spears  were  shaken, and horns and
trumpets sang, and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:
'Long live the Halflings! Praise them with great praise!
Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar'ni Pheriannath!
Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise!
Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annyn! Eglerio!
Praise them!
Eglerio!
A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet!
Praise them!
Cormacolindor, a laita tbrienna!
Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!'
And  so the  red blood blushing in their faces  and their eyes  shining
with wonder, Frodo  and Sam went forward  and saw  that amidst the
clamorous
host were set three high-seats  built of green turves. Behind the seat  upon
the right floated, white on green, a great horse running free; upon the left
was a banner, silver upon  blue, a ship swan-prowed faring on  the sea;  but
behind the highest throne in the midst of all a great standard was spread in
the  breeze,  and there a white  tree flowered upon a sable  field beneath a
shining crown and seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man,
a great sword was laid  across his knees, but he wore no  helm. As they drew
near he rose. And then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of
face, kingly, lord of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey.
Frodo  ran to meet  him, and Sam  followed close behind. 'Well, if that
isn't the crown of all!' he said. 'Strider, or I'm still asleep!'
'Yes, Sam, Strider,'  said Aragorn. 'It is a long way, is  it not, from
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours
has been the darkest road.'
And then to Sam's surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee before
them; and taking them by the hand,  Frodo upon  his  right and Sam upon  his
left, he led them to the throne, and  setting them upon it, he turned to the
men and captains who stood by and spoke, so that his voice rang over all the
host, crying:
'Praise them with great praise!'
And  when  the glad shout had swelled up and died away  again, to Sam's
final and  complete satisfaction  and pure joy, a  minstrel of Gondor  stood
forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold! he said:
'Lo! lords and knights and  men of valour unashamed, kings and princes,
and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan,  and ye sons of  Elrond, and
D®nedain  of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and greathearts of the Shire, and
all free folk of the West, now  listen to my lay. For  I will sing to you of
Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom.'
And when  Sam  heard that he laughed aloud for  sheer delight,  and  he
stood  up and cried:  'O great glory and  splendour! And all my wishes  have
come true!' And then he wept.
And all  the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment
and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold, and all
men  were hushed. And he  sang to them, now in the  Elven-tongue, now in the
speech  of  the  West,  until   their  hearts,  wounded  with  sweet  words,
overflowed, and their joy was like swords, and they passed in thought out to
regions where pain and delight flow together and tears are the  very wine of
blessedness.
And at the last, as the Sun fell from the  noon and the  shadows of the
trees lengthened,  he  ended. 'Praise them  with  great praise!' he said and
knelt. And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host arose, and they passed to
pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make merry while the day lasted.
Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there their old
raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour; and clean linen
was  given  to them. Then  Gandalf came and in his  arms,  to the  wonder of
Frodo, he  bore  the sword and the elven-cloak and the mithril-coat that had
been taken from him in Mordor. For Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and
his elven-cloak all healed of  the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and
then he laid before them two swords.
'I do not wish for any sword,' said Frodo.
'Tonight at least you should wear one,' said Gandalf.
Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and had  been
laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. 'Sting I gave to you Sam,' he said.
'No, master!  Mr. Bilbo gave it  to you,  and  it goes with his  silver
coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.'
Frodo gave way; and  Gandalf, as if  he  were their esquire, knelt  and
girt  the sword-belts about them, and  then rising he set circlets of silver
upon their heads. And when they were arrayed  they went  to the great feast;
and  they sat at the King's table with Gandalf, and King Jomer of Rohan, and
the Prince Imrahil and all the chief captains; and there also were Gimli and
Legolas.
But  when, after the  Standing Silence, wine was brought there came  in
two esquires to  serve  the kings; or  so they seemed to be: one was clad in
the silver and sable of the Guards  of Minas Tirith, and the other  in white
and green. But Sam wondered  what such young boys were  doing in an  army
of
mighty men. Then suddenly  as they  drew near and he could see them plainly,
he exclaimed:
'Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn't Pippin. Mr. Peregrin
Took I should say, and Mr.  Merry! How they have grown! Bless  me! But I
can
see there's more tales to tell than ours.'
'There  are indeed,' said Pippin turning towards him. 'And  we'll begin
telling them,  as soon  as this feast is ended. In the meantime you  can try
Gandalf. He's not so close as he used to be,  though he laughs now more than
he talks.  For the present Merry and I are busy.  We are knights of the City
and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.'
At last the glad day ended; and  when  the Sun  was gone and the  round
Moon  rode  slowly  above  the  mists of  Anduin  and flickered through  the
fluttering  leaves,  Frodo and  Sam sat under the whispering  trees amid the
fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into the  night  with Merry
and Pippin  and Gandalf, and after  a  while Legolas  and Gimli joined them.
There Frodo and  Sam learned much  of all that had happened to  the  Company
after their fellowship was broken on the  evil day  at Parth Galen by Rauros
Falls; and still there was always more to ask and more to tell.
Orcs, and talking  trees, and leagues of  grass,  and galloping riders.
and  glittering caves, and white towers and  golden halls, and  battles, and
tall  ships  sailing,  all  these  passed  before  Sam's  mind until he felt
bewildered.  But  amidst  all  these  wonders  he  returned  always  to  his
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them stand back to
back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head. 'Can't understand it  at
your  age!' he  said. 'But there it is: you're three  inches taller than you
ought to he, or I'm a dwarf.'
'That you certainly are not,' said  Gimli. 'But what did I say? Mortals
cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a
pot of beer.'
