the Prince Imrahil and all the chief captains; and there also were Gimli and
Legolas.
But  when, after the  Standing Silence, wine was brought there came  in
two esquires to  serve  the kings; or  so they seemed to be: one was clad in
the silver and sable of the Guards  of Minas Tirith, and the other  in white
and green. But Sam wondered  what such young boys were  doing in an  army
of
mighty men. Then suddenly  as they  drew near and he could see them plainly,
he exclaimed:
'Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn't Pippin. Mr. Peregrin
Took I should say, and Mr.  Merry! How they have grown! Bless  me! But I
can
see there's more tales to tell than ours.'
'There  are indeed,' said Pippin turning towards him. 'And  we'll begin
telling them,  as soon  as this feast is ended. In the meantime you  can try
Gandalf. He's not so close as he used to be,  though he laughs now more than
he talks.  For the present Merry and I are busy.  We are knights of the City
and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.'
At last the glad day ended; and  when  the Sun  was gone and the  round
Moon  rode  slowly  above  the  mists of  Anduin  and flickered through  the
fluttering  leaves,  Frodo and  Sam sat under the whispering  trees amid the
fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into the  night  with Merry
and Pippin  and Gandalf, and after  a  while Legolas  and Gimli joined them.
There Frodo and  Sam learned much  of all that had happened to  the  Company
after their fellowship was broken on the  evil day  at Parth Galen by Rauros
Falls; and still there was always more to ask and more to tell.
Orcs, and talking  trees, and leagues of  grass,  and galloping riders.
and  glittering caves, and white towers and  golden halls, and  battles, and
tall  ships  sailing,  all  these  passed  before  Sam's  mind until he felt
bewildered.  But  amidst  all  these  wonders  he  returned  always  to  his
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them stand back to
back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head. 'Can't understand it  at
your  age!' he  said. 'But there it is: you're three  inches taller than you
ought to he, or I'm a dwarf.'
'That you certainly are not,' said  Gimli. 'But what did I say? Mortals
cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a
pot of beer.'
'Ent-draughts?' said Sam. 'There you go about Ents again; but what they
are beats me. Why, it  will take weeks before we  get all these things sized
up!'
'Weeks indeed,' said Pippin. 'And then Frodo will have  to be locked up
in a tower in Minas Tirith and  write it  all down. Otherwise he will forget
half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.'
At length  Gandalf rose. 'The hands of the King  are  hands of healing,
dear friends,' he  said.  'But you  went  to the very brink of death ere  he
recalled  you,  putting forth all his power,  and  sent you  into the  sweet
forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly,
still it is now time to sleep again.'
And not  only Sam and Frodo  here, said  Gimli, but you too, Pippin.  I
love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me, which I shall never
forget. Nor shall I forget  finding you on the hill of  the last battle. But
for Gimli the Dwarf you  would have been lost  then. But at least I know now
the look of a  hobbit's foot, though it be all that can be seen under a heap
of bodies.  And when  I heaved that  great  carcase off you, I made sure you
were dead. I could have.  torn out my beard. And it is only a day  yet since
you were first up and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.'
'And  I,'  said  Legolas, 'shall walk in  the woods of this  fair land,
which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some of  our
folk shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed, for a while.
For a while: a month, a life,  a hundred years  of Men.  But Anduin is near,
and Anduin leads down to the Sea. To the Sea!
To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying,
The wind is blowing, and the white foam is flying.
West, west away, the round sun is falling.
Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling.
The voices of my people that have gone before me?
I will leave, I will leave the woods that bore me;
For our days are ending and our years failing.
I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing.
Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling,
Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,
In Eressla, in Elvenhome that no man can discover,
Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!'
And so singing Legolas went away down the hill.
Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their beds and
slept. And in the morning they  rose again in hope and peace; and they spent
many days  in  Ithilien. For the Field of Cormallen, where the host was  now
encamped was near to Henneth  Annyn,  and  the stream that  flowed  from its
falls could be heard  in the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate,
and passed through the flowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of
Cair Andros. The hobbits wandered here  and there visiting again the  places
that  they had passed before; and Sam hoped always  in  some shadow  of  the
woods or secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great Oliphaunt. And
when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of
these beasts but that they were all destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.
'Well, one  can't be everywhere  at once, I  suppose,'  he said. 'But I
missed a lot, seemingly.'
In the meanwhile  the host made  ready for  the return to Minas Tirith.
The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had laboured and  fought
much with the remnants  of  the  Easterlings  and Southrons, until  all were
subdued. And, latest of  all, those returned who had passed into  Mordor and
destroyed the fortresses in the north of the land.
But  at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of
the West set out again; and they  went  aboard ship with all  their men, and
they  sailed  from  Cair Andros  down Anduin to  Osgiliath; and  there  they
remained for one day; and the day after they came to the green fields of the
Pelennor and saw again the white  towers  under tall Mindolluin, the City of
the  Men of Gondor, last memory  of Westernesse, that had passed through the
darkness and fire to a new day.
And there in the  midst of the fields they set up  their pavilions  and
awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would enter his
gates with the rising of the Sun.
