Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their beds and
slept. And in the morning they  rose again in hope and peace; and they spent
many days  in  Ithilien. For the Field of Cormallen, where the host was  now
encamped was near to Henneth  Annyn,  and  the stream that  flowed  from its
falls could be heard  in the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate,
and passed through the flowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of
Cair Andros. The hobbits wandered here  and there visiting again the  places
that  they had passed before; and Sam hoped always  in  some shadow  of  the
woods or secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great Oliphaunt. And
when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of
these beasts but that they were all destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.
'Well, one  can't be everywhere  at once, I  suppose,'  he said. 'But I
missed a lot, seemingly.'
In the meanwhile  the host made  ready for  the return to Minas Tirith.
The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had laboured and  fought
much with the remnants  of  the  Easterlings  and Southrons, until  all were
subdued. And, latest of  all, those returned who had passed into  Mordor and
destroyed the fortresses in the north of the land.
But  at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of
the West set out again; and they  went  aboard ship with all  their men, and
they  sailed  from  Cair Andros  down Anduin to  Osgiliath; and  there  they
remained for one day; and the day after they came to the green fields of the
Pelennor and saw again the white  towers  under tall Mindolluin, the City of
the  Men of Gondor, last memory  of Westernesse, that had passed through the
darkness and fire to a new day.
And there in the  midst of the fields they set up  their pavilions  and
awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would enter his
gates with the rising of the Sun.
Chapter 5. The Steward and the King
Over  the city of Gondor doubt and  great  dread had hung. Fair weather
and clear  sun had seemed but a mockery to men whose days  held little hope,
and  who  looked each  morning  for  news  of doom. Their lord was  dead and
burned, dead lay the King of Rohan in their citadel,  and the  new king that
had  come to them in the night was gone again to  a war with powers too dark
and terrible for any might or valour to conquer. And no news came. After the
host left Morgul Vale and  took the northward road beneath the shadow of the
mountains no messenger had  returned nor any rumour  of what was passing  in
the brooding East.
When the Captains were but two days gone, the Lady Jowyn bade the
women
who tended her  to  bring her  raiment, and she would  not  be gainsaid, but
rose; and when they had clothed her and set her arm in a sling of linen, she
went to the Warden of the Houses of Healing.
'Sir,' she  said, 'I am in great  unrest,  and  I cannot lie longer  in
sloth.'
'Lady,' he answered, 'you are  not  yet  healed, and I was commanded to
tend you  with especial care. You should  not  have risen  from your bed for
seven days yet, or so I was bidden. I beg you to go back.'
'I am  healed,' she said,  'healed at  least in body, save  my left arm
only, and  that is at ease. But I shall sicken anew, if there is naught that
I can do. Are there no tidings of war? The women can tell me nothing.'
'There are  no tidings,' said the Warden,  'save  that  the  Lords have
ridden to Morgul Vale; and men say that the new captain out  of the North is
their chief. A great lord is that, and a  healer;  and it is a thing passing
strange to me that  the healing hand should  also wield the sword. It is not
thus  in Gondor now,  though once it was  so, if old tales be  true. But for
long years we healers have only sought to patch the rents made by the men of
swords. Though we should still have enough  to do without them: the world is
full enough of hurts and mischances without wars to multiply them.'
It needs but one foe to breed a war, not two,  Master  Warden, answered
Jowyn. 'And those who  have not swords can  still die  upon them. Would  you
have  the folk  of Gondor gather you herbs  only, when the Dark Lord gathers
armies? And it  is not  always good  to be healed in  body. Nor is it always
evil to die in battle, even  in bitter pain. Were I permitted,  in this dark
hour I would choose the latter.'
The Warden looked at her. Tall she stood there, her eyes  bright in her
white face, her hand clenched as she turned and gazed out of his window that
opened to the East. He sighed and shook his head. After a pause  she  turned
to him again.
'Is there no deed to do?' she said. 'Who commands in this City?'
'I do not  rightly know,' he  answered. 'Such things are  not my  care.
There is a marshal over the Riders  of Rohan; and the Lord H®rin, I am told,
commands the men of Gondor. But  the Lord Faramir is by right the Steward of
the City.'
'Where can I find him?'
'In this house, lady. He was sorely  hurt,  but is now set again on the
way to health. But I do not know--'
'Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know.'
The Lord  Faramir was  walking  alone in  the garden  of the  Houses of
Healing, and the sunlight warmed him, and he felt life run new in his veins;
but his heart  was heavy, and he looked  out  over the  walls  eastward. And
coming, the Warden  spoke his name, and he turned and saw the Lady  Jowyn
of
Rohan; and he  was  moved with pity, for  he saw that she was hurt,  and his
clear sight perceived her sorrow and unrest.
'My lord,' said  the Warden, 'here is the Lady Jowyn of Rohan. She rode
with the king and  was sorely hurt, and dwells now in my keeping. But she is
not content, and she wishes to speak to the Steward of the City.'
'Do not misunderstand him, lord,'  said Jowyn. 'It is not lack  of care
that  grieves me.  No  houses  could be  fairer, for those who  desire to be
healed.  But I  cannot  lie  in sloth,  idle,  caged. I looked  for death in
battle. But I have not died, and battle still goes on.'
At a sign from  Faramir, the Warden bowed and departed. 'What would you
have me do, lady?' said Faramir.  'I also am a prisoner of the healers.'  He
looked  at her, and being a man  whom pity deeply stirred,  it seemed to him
that her loveliness amid her grief would pierce his heart. And she looked at
him and saw the grave tenderness in his eyes, and yet knew, for she was bred
among men of war, that here was one whom no Rider of the Mark would
outmatch
