armies? And it  is not  always good  to be healed in  body. Nor is it always
evil to die in battle, even  in bitter pain. Were I permitted,  in this dark
hour I would choose the latter.'
The Warden looked at her. Tall she stood there, her eyes  bright in her
white face, her hand clenched as she turned and gazed out of his window that
opened to the East. He sighed and shook his head. After a pause  she  turned
to him again.
'Is there no deed to do?' she said. 'Who commands in this City?'
'I do not  rightly know,' he  answered. 'Such things are  not my  care.
There is a marshal over the Riders  of Rohan; and the Lord H®rin, I am told,
commands the men of Gondor. But  the Lord Faramir is by right the Steward of
the City.'
'Where can I find him?'
'In this house, lady. He was sorely  hurt,  but is now set again on the
way to health. But I do not know--'
'Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know.'
The Lord  Faramir was  walking  alone in  the garden  of the  Houses of
Healing, and the sunlight warmed him, and he felt life run new in his veins;
but his heart  was heavy, and he looked  out  over the  walls  eastward. And
coming, the Warden  spoke his name, and he turned and saw the Lady  Jowyn
of
Rohan; and he  was  moved with pity, for  he saw that she was hurt,  and his
clear sight perceived her sorrow and unrest.
'My lord,' said  the Warden, 'here is the Lady Jowyn of Rohan. She rode
with the king and  was sorely hurt, and dwells now in my keeping. But she is
not content, and she wishes to speak to the Steward of the City.'
'Do not misunderstand him, lord,'  said Jowyn. 'It is not lack  of care
that  grieves me.  No  houses  could be  fairer, for those who  desire to be
healed.  But I  cannot  lie  in sloth,  idle,  caged. I looked  for death in
battle. But I have not died, and battle still goes on.'
At a sign from  Faramir, the Warden bowed and departed. 'What would you
have me do, lady?' said Faramir.  'I also am a prisoner of the healers.'  He
looked  at her, and being a man  whom pity deeply stirred,  it seemed to him
that her loveliness amid her grief would pierce his heart. And she looked at
him and saw the grave tenderness in his eyes, and yet knew, for she was bred
among men of war, that here was one whom no Rider of the Mark would
outmatch
in battle.
'What  do you wish?' he said again. 'If  it lies in my power, I will do
it.'
'I would have  you  command this  Warden, and bid him  let me go,'  she
said; but though her words were still proud, her heart faltered, and for the
first time she doubted herself. She  guessed  that this tall man, both stern
and  gentle, might think  her merely wayward, like a child that has not  the
firmness of mind to go on with a dull task to the end.
'I myself am  in the Warden's  keeping,' answered Faramir. 'Nor  have I
yet taken  up my authority in the City. But  had I done so,  I  should still
listen to  his counsel,  and should  not cross  his will in  matters of  his
craft, unless in some great need.'
'But I do not desire healing,' she said. 'I wish to ride to war like my
brother Jomer, or better  like  Thjoden the king, for he  died  and has both
honour and peace.'
'It  is too late, lady,  to follow the Captains, even  if you  had  the
strength,'  said Faramir.  'But death  in battle  may  come  to  us all yet,
willing  or unwilling. You will be  better prepared to  face it in your  own
manner, if while there is still time you do as the Healer commanded. You and
I, we must endure with patience the hours of waiting.'
She  did not answer, but  as  he looked  at her it  seemed to  him that
something  in her  softened, as though  a bitter frost  were yielding at the
first faint presage of Spring. A  tear sprang in her  eye  and fell down her
cheek, like  a  glistening rain-drop.  Her proud head drooped a little. Then
quietly, more as if speaking  to herself than to him: 'But the healers would
have me lie abed seven days yet,'  she said. 'And  my  window does not  look
eastward.' Her voice was now that of a maiden young and sad.
Faramir  smiled, though his heart was  filled with  pity.  'Your window
does not look eastward?'  he said. 'That  can be  amended.  In  this I  will
command  the Warden. If  you will stay in this  house in our care, lady, and
take your rest, then you  shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will;
and you shall  look east, whither all our hopes have gone. And here you will
find me, walking and waiting, and also looking east.  It would ease my care,
if you would speak to me, or walk at whiles with me.'
Then she raised her head and looked him in the eyes again; and a colour
came in her  pale face.  'How should I ease your care,  my  lord?' she said.
'And I do not desire the speech of living men.'
'Would you have my plain answer?' he said.
'I would.'
'Then, Jowyn  of Rohan, I say to  you  that you  are  beautiful. In the
valleys  of our hills there are flowers fair  and bright, and maidens fairer
still; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in Gondor so lovely,
and so sorrowful. It may be that only a few days are left ere darkness falls
upon our world,  and when it comes I hope to  face it steadily; but it would
ease my heart, if while the Sun yet shines, I  could see you  still. For you
and I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow, and the same hand drew
us back.'
'Alas, not me, lord!' she said. 'Shadow  lies on me still.  Look not to
me for healing! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle. But I thank you
for this at least, that I need not keep to my chamber. I will walk abroad by
the grace of the Steward of the City.' And she did him a courtesy and walked
back to the house. But Faramir for a long while walked  alone in the garden,
and his glance now strayed rather to the house than to the eastward walls.
When he returned to his chamber he called for the Warden, and heard all
that he could tell of the Lady of Rohan.
'But I doubt  not,  lord,'  said the Warden, 'that you would learn more
from the Halfling that is with us; for he was in the riding of the king, and
with the Lady at the end, they say.'
And so Merry was sent to Faramir, and while that day lasted they talked
long  together, and  Faramir  learned  much, more  even  than Merry put into
words; and  he  thought  that he understood now  something of the grief  and
unrest of Jowyn of Rohan. And in the  fair evening Faramir and  Merry walked
in the garden, but she did not come.
But in the morning, as Faramir came from the Houses, he saw her, as she
stood upon the walls; and she was clad all in white, and gleamed in the sun.
And he called to her, and she came down, and they walked on the grass or sat
under a green  tree  together, now in  silence, now in speech. And  each day
after they did likewise. And the Warden looking  from his window was glad in
heart.  for  he was a healer. and his care was lightened; and certain it was
that, heavy as was the dread and foreboding of those days upon the hearts of
men, still these two of his charges prospered and grew daily in strength.
And so the  fifth day came since the Lady Jowyn went  first to Faramir;
and they stood now together once more upon the walls of  the City and looked
out. No tidings  had  yet come, and all hearts  were darkened. The  weather,
