'Would you have my plain answer?' he said.
'I would.'
'Then, Jowyn  of Rohan, I say to  you  that you  are  beautiful. In the
valleys  of our hills there are flowers fair  and bright, and maidens fairer
still; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in Gondor so lovely,
and so sorrowful. It may be that only a few days are left ere darkness falls
upon our world,  and when it comes I hope to  face it steadily; but it would
ease my heart, if while the Sun yet shines, I  could see you  still. For you
and I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow, and the same hand drew
us back.'
'Alas, not me, lord!' she said. 'Shadow  lies on me still.  Look not to
me for healing! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle. But I thank you
for this at least, that I need not keep to my chamber. I will walk abroad by
the grace of the Steward of the City.' And she did him a courtesy and walked
back to the house. But Faramir for a long while walked  alone in the garden,
and his glance now strayed rather to the house than to the eastward walls.
When he returned to his chamber he called for the Warden, and heard all
that he could tell of the Lady of Rohan.
'But I doubt  not,  lord,'  said the Warden, 'that you would learn more
from the Halfling that is with us; for he was in the riding of the king, and
with the Lady at the end, they say.'
And so Merry was sent to Faramir, and while that day lasted they talked
long  together, and  Faramir  learned  much, more  even  than Merry put into
words; and  he  thought  that he understood now  something of the grief  and
unrest of Jowyn of Rohan. And in the  fair evening Faramir and  Merry walked
in the garden, but she did not come.
But in the morning, as Faramir came from the Houses, he saw her, as she
stood upon the walls; and she was clad all in white, and gleamed in the sun.
And he called to her, and she came down, and they walked on the grass or sat
under a green  tree  together, now in  silence, now in speech. And  each day
after they did likewise. And the Warden looking  from his window was glad in
heart.  for  he was a healer. and his care was lightened; and certain it was
that, heavy as was the dread and foreboding of those days upon the hearts of
men, still these two of his charges prospered and grew daily in strength.
And so the  fifth day came since the Lady Jowyn went  first to Faramir;
and they stood now together once more upon the walls of  the City and looked
out. No tidings  had  yet come, and all hearts  were darkened. The  weather,
too, was  bright  no  longer. It was cold. A wind  that had sprung up in the
night was  blowing  now keenly from  the North, and it was  rising; but  the
lands about looked grey and drear.
They were clad in warm  raiment and heavy cloaks, and over all the Lady
Jowyn wore a  great blue  mantle of  the colour of deep summer-night, and it
was set with silver stars  about hem and  throat. Faramir had  sent for this
robe and had wrapped it about her;  and he thought that  she looked fair and
queenly indeed as  she stood there at  his  side. The mantle was wrought for
his  mother,  Finduilas of Amroth,  who died untimely, and was  to him but a
memory of loveliness in far days and of his first grief; and her robe seemed
to him raiment fitting for the beauty and sadness of Jowyn.
But  she  now  shivered  beneath the  starry  mantle,  and  she  looked
northward, above the grey hither lands, into the eye of the  cold wind where
far away the sky was hard and clear.
'What do you look for, Jowyn?' said Faramir.
'Does not the Black Gate lie yonder?' said she. 'And must he not now be
come thither? It is seven days since he rode away.'
'Seven days,' said Faramir. 'But think not ill of me, if I say  to you:
they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know. Joy
to see you; but pain, because now the fear  and doubt  of this evil time are
grown dark  indeed. Jowyn, I would  not have this world end now, or lose  so
soon what I have found.'
'Lose what you have found,  lord?' she answered; but she looked at  him
gravely and her eyes  were  kind. 'I know  not what in  these days you  have
found that you could lose. But come, my friend,  let us not speak of it! Let
us not speak at all! I  stand  upon some dreadful  brink,  and it is utterly
dark in the abyss before my feet, but whether there is any light behind me I
cannot tell. For I cannot turn yet. I wait for some stroke of doom.'
'Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom,' said Faramir.  And  they said no
more; and it seemed to them as  they stood upon the wall that the wind died,
and the light failed, and the Sun was bleared, and all sounds in the City or
in the  lands about were hushed: neither wind, nor voice, nor bird-call, nor
rustle  of leaf,  nor  their own breath could  be heard; the very beating of
their hearts was stilled. Time halted.
And as they stood so, their hands met and  clasped, though they did not
know  it.  And still  they waited for they  knew not what. Then presently it
seemed to them that above the ridges  of the distant  mountains another vast
mountain of darkness  rose, towering up like a wave  that  should engulf the
world, and about it  lightnings flickered; and then a tremor ran through the
earth, and they felt the  walls of the City quiver. A sound like a sigh went
up from all the lands about them; and their hearts beat suddenly again.
'It  reminds me of N®menor,' said Faramir, and wondered to hear himself
speak.
'Of N®menor?' said Jowyn.
'Yes,' said Faramir, 'of the land of Westernesse that  foundered and of
the great dark wave climbing  over the green lands and above the hills,  and
coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.'
'Then  you  think that the  Darkness is coming?' said Jowyn.  'Darkness
Unescapable?' And suddenly she drew close to him.
'No,' said Faramir, looking into her face. 'It was but a picture in the
mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking mind tells
me
that great evil  has befallen and we  stand at the end of days. But my heart
says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that
no reason can deny. Jowyn, Jowyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not
believe that any darkness will endure!' And he stooped and kissed her brow.
And so they stood on the walls of the City of Gondor,  and a great wind
rose and blew, and  their hair, raven  and golden, streamed out  mingling in
the air. And the Shadow departed, and the Sun was unveiled, and light leaped
forth; and the waters of Anduin shone like silver, and in all  the houses of
the  City  men  sang for  the joy that welled  up in their hearts  from what
source they could not tell.
And before the Sun had fallen far  from the noon out of  the East there
came a great Eagle flying, and he bore tidings beyond hope from the Lords of
the West, crying:
Sing now, ye people of the Tower of Anor,
for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever,
and the Dark Tower is thrown down.
Sing and rejoice, ye people of the Tower of Guard,
for your watch hath not been in vain,
and the Black Gate is broken,
and your King hath passed through,
and he is victorious.
