mountain of darkness  rose, towering up like a wave  that  should engulf the
world, and about it  lightnings flickered; and then a tremor ran through the
earth, and they felt the  walls of the City quiver. A sound like a sigh went
up from all the lands about them; and their hearts beat suddenly again.
'It  reminds me of N®menor,' said Faramir, and wondered to hear himself
speak.
'Of N®menor?' said Jowyn.
'Yes,' said Faramir, 'of the land of Westernesse that  foundered and of
the great dark wave climbing  over the green lands and above the hills,  and
coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.'
'Then  you  think that the  Darkness is coming?' said Jowyn.  'Darkness
Unescapable?' And suddenly she drew close to him.
'No,' said Faramir, looking into her face. 'It was but a picture in the
mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking mind tells
me
that great evil  has befallen and we  stand at the end of days. But my heart
says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that
no reason can deny. Jowyn, Jowyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not
believe that any darkness will endure!' And he stooped and kissed her brow.
And so they stood on the walls of the City of Gondor,  and a great wind
rose and blew, and  their hair, raven  and golden, streamed out  mingling in
the air. And the Shadow departed, and the Sun was unveiled, and light leaped
forth; and the waters of Anduin shone like silver, and in all  the houses of
the  City  men  sang for  the joy that welled  up in their hearts  from what
source they could not tell.
And before the Sun had fallen far  from the noon out of  the East there
came a great Eagle flying, and he bore tidings beyond hope from the Lords of
the West, crying:
Sing now, ye people of the Tower of Anor,
for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever,
and the Dark Tower is thrown down.
Sing and rejoice, ye people of the Tower of Guard,
for your watch hath not been in vain,
and the Black Gate is broken,
and your King hath passed through,
and he is victorious.
Sing and be glad, all ye children of the West,
for your King shall come again,
and he shall dwell among you
all the days of your life.
And the Tree that was withered shall be renewed,
and he shall plant it in the high places,
and the City shall be blessed.
Sing all ye people!
And the people sang in all the ways of the City.
The  days  that followed were golden,  and Spring and Summer joined and
made revel  together in  the fields of Gondor. And tidings now came by swift
riders from Cair  Andros of all  that  was done, and the City made ready for
the coming of the King. Merry was summoned and rode away with the wains
that
took store  of  goods to Osgiliath and thence by  ship  to Cair  Andros; but
Faramir did not go,  for now being healed he took upon him his authority and
the  Stewardship, although it was only for a little while, and his duty  was
to prepare for one who should replace him.
And Jowyn did not go, though her brother sent  word begging her to come
to  the  field of  Cormallen.  And Faramir  wondered at this, but he saw her
seldom, being  busy  with many matters; and she dwelt still in the Houses of
Healing and walked alone in the garden, and her face grew pale again, and it
seemed that  in  all the City she  only  was ailing  and sorrowful.  And the
Warden of the Houses was troubled, and he spoke to Faramir.
Then Faramir came and sought her, and once more they stood on the walls
together; and he said to  her: 'Jowyn, why  do you tarry here, and do not go
to the rejoicing in  Cormallen beyond Cair Andros, where your brother awaits
you?'
And she said: 'Do you not know?'
But he answered: 'Two reasons there may be, but which is true, l do not
know.'
And she said: 'I do not wish to play at riddles. Speak plainer!'
'Then if you will have it so, lady,' he  said: 'you do  not go, because
only your brother called for you, and to look on the Lord Aragorn, Elendil's
heir, in his triumph would now bring you no joy. Or because I do not go, and
you  desire still to be near me. And maybe for both  these reasons,  and you
yourself cannot choose between them. Jowyn, do  you not love me, or will you
not?'
'I wished to be loved by another,' she answered. 'But I desire no man's
pity.'
'That I know,' he  said. 'You  desired  to  have  the love  of the Lord
Aragorn. Because he was high and puissant, and you wished to have renown
and
glory and to be  lifted far above the  mean things that crawl on  the earth.
And as a great captain may to a young soldier  he seemed  to you  admirable.
For so he is, a lord among men,  the greatest that  now is. But when he gave
you only  understanding and pity, then you desired to have nothing, unless a
brave death in battle. Look at me, Jowyn!'
And Jowyn  looked at Faramir long and  steadily; and Faramir  said: 'Do
not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Jowyn! But I do not offer
you my pity. For  you  are  a lady high  and valiant  and  have yourself won
renown that shall not be forgotten; and you  are  a lady  beautiful, I deem,
beyond even the words of  the Elven-tongue  to tell. And I love  you. Once I
pitied your sorrow. But now, were you sorrowless, without fear  or any lack,
were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. Jowyn, do you
not love me?'
Then the heart of Jowyn changed, or else at last she understood it. And
suddenly her winter passed, and the sun shone on her.
I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun,  she  said; and behold the
Shadow has departed! I  will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor  vie  with the
great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer,
and love all things that  grow and are not barren.' And again  she looked at
Faramir. 'No longer do I desire to be a queen,' she said.
Then Faramir laughed merrily. 'That is well,' he said; 'for I am not  a
king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if
she  will, then let us cross  the  River and in happier days let us dwell in
fair Ithilien  and there make a garden. All things will grow with joy there,
if the White Lady comes.'
'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?' she said. 'And  would
you have  your proud  folk say of you: (There  goes a  lord who tamed a wild
shieldmaiden  of the North! Was  there  no woman of the race  of N®menor  to
