heir, in his triumph would now bring you no joy. Or because I do not go, and
you  desire still to be near me. And maybe for both  these reasons,  and you
yourself cannot choose between them. Jowyn, do  you not love me, or will you
not?'
'I wished to be loved by another,' she answered. 'But I desire no man's
pity.'
'That I know,' he  said. 'You  desired  to  have  the love  of the Lord
Aragorn. Because he was high and puissant, and you wished to have renown
and
glory and to be  lifted far above the  mean things that crawl on  the earth.
And as a great captain may to a young soldier  he seemed  to you  admirable.
For so he is, a lord among men,  the greatest that  now is. But when he gave
you only  understanding and pity, then you desired to have nothing, unless a
brave death in battle. Look at me, Jowyn!'
And Jowyn  looked at Faramir long and  steadily; and Faramir  said: 'Do
not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Jowyn! But I do not offer
you my pity. For  you  are  a lady high  and valiant  and  have yourself won
renown that shall not be forgotten; and you  are  a lady  beautiful, I deem,
beyond even the words of  the Elven-tongue  to tell. And I love  you. Once I
pitied your sorrow. But now, were you sorrowless, without fear  or any lack,
were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. Jowyn, do you
not love me?'
Then the heart of Jowyn changed, or else at last she understood it. And
suddenly her winter passed, and the sun shone on her.
I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun,  she  said; and behold the
Shadow has departed! I  will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor  vie  with the
great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer,
and love all things that  grow and are not barren.' And again  she looked at
Faramir. 'No longer do I desire to be a queen,' she said.
Then Faramir laughed merrily. 'That is well,' he said; 'for I am not  a
king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if
she  will, then let us cross  the  River and in happier days let us dwell in
fair Ithilien  and there make a garden. All things will grow with joy there,
if the White Lady comes.'
'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?' she said. 'And  would
you have  your proud  folk say of you: (There  goes a  lord who tamed a wild
shieldmaiden  of the North! Was  there  no woman of the race  of N速menor  to
choose?('
'I  would,'  said  Faramir. And he took her in his arms and  kissed her
under  the  sunlit sky, and he cared not that they stood high upon the walls
in  the  sight  of many. And many indeed saw  them  and the light that shone
about them as they came down from  the  walls  and went hand in hand  to the
Houses of Healing.
And to the Warden of  the Houses Faramir said:  'Here is the Lady Jowyn
of Rohan, and now she is healed.'
And the  Warden  said: 'Then I release her from  my charge and bid  her
farewell, and may she suffer never hurt nor sickness again. I commend her to
the care of the Steward of the City, until her brother returns.'
But Jowyn said:  'Yet  now that I have leave to depart, I would remain.
For this House has become to me of all dwellings  the most blessed.' And she
remained there until King Jomer came.
All things  were  now  made  ready  in  the City; and there  was  great
concourse of  people, for the tidings had gone out into all parts of Gondor,
from Min-Rimmon even to Pinnath Gelin and the far coasts of the sea; and all
that could  come to the  City made haste  to come.  And the City  was filled
again with women  and fair children  that returned to their homes laden with
flowers;  and from Dol Amroth came the harpers that harped most skilfully in
all the land; and there  were players upon viols and  upon  flutes and  upon
horns of silver, and clear-voiced singers from the vales of Lebennin.
At last an evening came when from the walls the pavilions could be seen
upon  the field, and all night lights were  burning as men  watched for  the
dawn. And when the sun rose in  the clear morning above the mountains in the
East, upon which shadows lay no more, then  all  the bells rang, and all the
banners  broke  and  flowed in the wind;  and upon  the White  Tower  of the
citadel the standard of  the Stewards,  bright argent like snow  in the sun,
bearing no charge nor device, was raised over Gondor for the last time.
Now the Captains of the West  led their host towards the City, and folk
saw them advance in line upon line, flashing and glinting in the sunrise and
rippling  like silver.  And  so they came  before the Gateway and  halted  a
furlong from the walls. As yet no gates had been set up again, but a barrier
was laid across the entrance  to the City, and  there  stood men at  arms in
silver  and  black with long swords drawn.  Before the barrier stood Faramir
the Steward, and H速rin Warden of the Keys, and other captains of Gondor, and
the  Lady  Jowyn of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many  knights of  the
Mark; and upon either  side of  the Gate was a great press of fair people in
raiment of many colours and garlands of flowers.
So now there was a wide space before  the walls of Minas Tirith, and it
was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the  soldiers of Gondor  and
of Rohan, and by the people of the City and of all parts of the land. A hush
fell upon all as out from the host stepped  the D速nedain in silver and grey;
and before  them  came  walking slow the Lord Aragorn. He was  clad in black
mail  girt  with silver, and  he wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at
the throat with a great jewel  of green that shone  from afar;  but his head
was bare  save for a star  upon his forehead bound  by a  slender fillet  of
silver.  With him were Jomer of Rohan,  and the Prince  Imrahil, and Gandalf
robed all in white, and four small figures that many men marvelled to see.
'Nay,  cousin! they are  not  boys,' said Ioreth to her  kinswoman from
Imloth  Melui,  who stood beside  her. 'Those  are               Periain  , out  of the  far
country of  the Halflings, where they are princes of great fame, it is said.
I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They are small, but they
are valiant. Why, cousin, one  of them went  with only his esquire  into the
Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire  to
his  Tower,  if  you can believe it. At least that is  the tale in the City.
That will be the one that walks with our Elfstone. They are dear friends,  I
hear.  Now  he  is  a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech,
mind  you, but  he  has a golden heart,  as  the saying is; and  he has  the
healing hands. (The hands  of the king are  the  hands of a healer(, I said;
and  that was how  it  was all  discovered. And  Mithrandir,  he said to me:
(Ioreth, men will long remember your words(, and--'
But  Ioreth  was  not  permitted  to  continue the instruction  of  her
kinswoman  from  the country,  for a single trumpet rang, and a dead silence
followed. Then forth from the Gate went  Faramir with H速rin of the Keys, and
no  others, save  that behind  them  walked four men  in  the high helms and
armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great casket of black                 lebethron    bound
with silver.
Faramir met  Aragorn in  the  midst  of those there  assembled, and  he
knelt,  and said: 'The last  Steward of Gondor begs  leave to  surrender his
office.' And he held out a  white rod; but Aragorn took the  rod and gave it
back, saying:  'That  office is  not ended, and  it shall be thine  and  thy
heirs' as long as my line shall last. Do now thy office!'
Then Faramir stood up and spoke in  a clear voice:  'Men of Gondor hear
