Mark; and upon either  side of  the Gate was a great press of fair people in
raiment of many colours and garlands of flowers.
So now there was a wide space before  the walls of Minas Tirith, and it
was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the  soldiers of Gondor  and
of Rohan, and by the people of the City and of all parts of the land. A hush
fell upon all as out from the host stepped  the D®nedain in silver and grey;
and before  them  came  walking slow the Lord Aragorn. He was  clad in black
mail  girt  with silver, and  he wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at
the throat with a great jewel  of green that shone  from afar;  but his head
was bare  save for a star  upon his forehead bound  by a  slender fillet  of
silver.  With him were Jomer of Rohan,  and the Prince  Imrahil, and Gandalf
robed all in white, and four small figures that many men marvelled to see.
'Nay,  cousin! they are  not  boys,' said Ioreth to her  kinswoman from
Imloth  Melui,  who stood beside  her. 'Those  are               Periain  , out  of the  far
country of  the Halflings, where they are princes of great fame, it is said.
I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They are small, but they
are valiant. Why, cousin, one  of them went  with only his esquire  into the
Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire  to
his  Tower,  if  you can believe it. At least that is  the tale in the City.
That will be the one that walks with our Elfstone. They are dear friends,  I
hear.  Now  he  is  a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech,
mind  you, but  he  has a golden heart,  as  the saying is; and  he has  the
healing hands. (The hands  of the king are  the  hands of a healer(, I said;
and  that was how  it  was all  discovered. And  Mithrandir,  he said to me:
(Ioreth, men will long remember your words(, and--'
But  Ioreth  was  not  permitted  to  continue the instruction  of  her
kinswoman  from  the country,  for a single trumpet rang, and a dead silence
followed. Then forth from the Gate went  Faramir with H®rin of the Keys, and
no  others, save  that behind  them  walked four men  in  the high helms and
armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great casket of black                 lebethron    bound
with silver.
Faramir met  Aragorn in  the  midst  of those there  assembled, and  he
knelt,  and said: 'The last  Steward of Gondor begs  leave to  surrender his
office.' And he held out a  white rod; but Aragorn took the  rod and gave it
back, saying:  'That  office is  not ended, and  it shall be thine  and  thy
heirs' as long as my line shall last. Do now thy office!'
Then Faramir stood up and spoke in  a clear voice:  'Men of Gondor hear
now the  Steward of this Realm! Behold! one has come  to  claim the kingship
again at last. Here is Aragorn son of Arathorn, chieftain of the D®nedain of
Arnor,  Captain of the Host of  the West,  bearer of the  Star of the North,
wielder of  the Sword  Reforged, victorious  in  battle,  whose hands  bring
healing,  the Elfstone,  Elessar  of  the line of Valandil,  Isildur's  son,
Elendil's son of N®menor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell
there?'
And all the host and all the people cried          yea  with one voice.
And Ioreth  said  to her kinswoman: 'This is just a ceremony such as we
have in the City, cousin; for  he has already entered, as I was telling you;
and he said  to me--' And then again she was obliged to silence, for Faramir
spoke again.
'Men of Gondor, the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that
the king should receive the  crown from his father ere  he died; or if  that
might not be, that  he should  go alone and  take  it from the hands  of his
father  in the tomb  where  he was  laid.  But since things must now be done
otherwise,  using the authority of the Steward, I  have today brought hither
from Rath Dnnen the  crown of Edrnur the last king, whose days passed in the
time of our longfathers of old.'
Then the  guards stepped forward, and Faramir opened the casket, and he
held up an ancient  crown. It was shaped like the helms of the Guards of the
Citadel, save  that it was loftier, and it was all  white, and the  wings at
either side were wrought of pearl and silver in the likeness of the wings of
a sea-bird, for it was the emblem of kings  who came over the Sea; and seven
gems  of adamant  were  set  in  the circlet, and upon  its summit was set a
single jewel the light of which went up like a flame.
Then Aragorn took the crown and held it up and said:
Et  Edrello  Endorenna  ut®lien.  Sinome  maruvan  ar  Hildinyar  tenn'
Ambar-metta!
And those were the  words that Elendil spoke when he came up out of the
Sea on the wings  of  the wind: 'Out of  the Great Sea to  Middle-earth I am
come.  In this place will I abide,  and  my heirs, unto  the  ending of  the
world.'
Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon his head,
but  gave it back to Faramir, and  said: 'By the labour and valour of many I
have come into my inheritance. In token of this I would have the Ring-bearer
bring the crown to me,  and let Mithrandir set it upon my  head, if he will;
for he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his
victory.'
Then Frodo came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore  it to
Gandalf; and Aragorn  knelt,  and Gandalf set the White Crown upon his head,
and said:
'Now  come  the days  of the  King, and may  they be blessed  while the
thrones of the Valar endure!'
But when  Aragorn arose  all that beheld him  gazed in  silence, for it
seemed to them  that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as
the sea-kings of old, he stood  above all that were near; ancient of days he
seemed and yet in  the flower of manhood; and wisdom sat upon his brow,  and
strength and healing were in his hands, and a light was  about him. And then
Faramir cried:
'Behold the King!'
And  in that moment all the trumpets  were  blown, and the King Elessar
went  forth and came to the barrier, and  H®rin  of the Keys thrust it back;
and amid the music of harp and of viol and of flute and the singing of clear
voices the  King passed through  the flower-laden streets,  and  came to the
Citadel,  and  entered  in;  and the banner  of  the Tree and the Stars  was
unfurled  upon the topmost tower,  and  the reign of King Elessar began,  of
which many songs have told.
In his time  the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in
the  days of  its first  glory;  and it  was  filled  with  trees  and  with
fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril  and steel, and its streets
were paved  with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in  it,
and the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made
good, and  the  houses were filled with men  and women  and  the laughter of
children,  and no window was blind nor any courtyard  empty;  and after  the
ending  of  the Third  Age of  the world into the  new  age it preserved the
memory and the glory of the years that were gone.
In the days  that  followed his crowning  the King sat on his throne in
the Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgements. And embassies came
from
many lands and peoples, from the East and the South, and from the borders of
Mirkwood,  and  from  Dunland  in  the  west.  And  the  King  pardoned  the
Easterlings that had  given themselves up, and sent them  away free, and  he
made peace with  the peoples of Harad;  and the slaves of Mordor he released
