for he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his
victory.'
Then Frodo came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore  it to
Gandalf; and Aragorn  knelt,  and Gandalf set the White Crown upon his head,
and said:
'Now  come  the days  of the  King, and may  they be blessed  while the
thrones of the Valar endure!'
But when  Aragorn arose  all that beheld him  gazed in  silence, for it
seemed to them  that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as
the sea-kings of old, he stood  above all that were near; ancient of days he
seemed and yet in  the flower of manhood; and wisdom sat upon his brow,  and
strength and healing were in his hands, and a light was  about him. And then
Faramir cried:
'Behold the King!'
And  in that moment all the trumpets  were  blown, and the King Elessar
went  forth and came to the barrier, and  H®rin  of the Keys thrust it back;
and amid the music of harp and of viol and of flute and the singing of clear
voices the  King passed through  the flower-laden streets,  and  came to the
Citadel,  and  entered  in;  and the banner  of  the Tree and the Stars  was
unfurled  upon the topmost tower,  and  the reign of King Elessar began,  of
which many songs have told.
In his time  the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in
the  days of  its first  glory;  and it  was  filled  with  trees  and  with
fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril  and steel, and its streets
were paved  with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in  it,
and the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made
good, and  the  houses were filled with men  and women  and  the laughter of
children,  and no window was blind nor any courtyard  empty;  and after  the
ending  of  the Third  Age of  the world into the  new  age it preserved the
memory and the glory of the years that were gone.
In the days  that  followed his crowning  the King sat on his throne in
the Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgements. And embassies came
from
many lands and peoples, from the East and the South, and from the borders of
Mirkwood,  and  from  Dunland  in  the  west.  And  the  King  pardoned  the
Easterlings that had  given themselves up, and sent them  away free, and  he
made peace with  the peoples of Harad;  and the slaves of Mordor he released
and gave  to them all the lands about Lake N®rnen to be their own. And there
were  brought  before him many to  receive  his praise and reward  for their
valour; and  last the  captain  of the Guard brought to him  Beregond  to be
judged.
And  the  King said  to  Beregond: 'Beregond, by  your sword blood  was
spilled  in the Hallows, where that  is forbidden.  Also  you left your post
without leave of Lord or of Captain. For these things, of old, death was the
penalty. Now therefore I must pronounce your doom.
'All penalty  is remitted  for  your valour in battle,  and still  more
because all that you  did was for the love of the Lord Faramir.  Nonetheless
you must leave the Guard of the Citadel, and you must go forth from the City
of Minas Tirith.'
Then the blood left Beregond's face, and he was stricken to  the  heart
and bowed his head. But the King said.:
'So it must be,  for you are  appointed to the White Company, the Guard
of Faramir,  Prince of Ithilien, and you shall  be its captain  and dwell in
Emyn  Arnen in  honour  and peace, and in  the service of him  for whom  you
risked all, to save him from death.'
And then Beregond, perceiving the mercy  and justice  of the  King, was
glad,  and kneeling kissed his hand, and  departed  in joy  and content. And
Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to  be his princedom, and bade him dwell in
the hills of Emyn Arnen within sight of the City.
'For,' said he, 'Minas Ithil in Morgul Vale shall be utterly destroyed,
and though it may in time to come be made clean,  no man may dwell there for
many long years.'
And last of  all Aragorn greeted Jomer of Rohan, and they embraced, and
Aragorn said: 'Between  us there can be no word of giving or taking,  nor of
reward; for we are brethren. In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North, and
never has  any league of peoples been more blessed, so that neither has ever
failed the other, nor shall fail. Now, as you know, we have laid Thjoden the
Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the
Kings of Gondor, if you will. Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and
bring him back to rest with his own people.'
And Jomer answered: 'Since the day when you rose before me  out of  the
green grass of the downs I have loved you, and that love shall not fail. But
now I must depart  for a while to my own realm, where there is much  to heal
and set in order.  But as for  the Fallen,  when  all is made ready we  will
return for him; but here let him sleep a while.'
And Jowyn  said to Faramir: 'Now I must go back to my own land and look
on it once again, and help my brother in his labour;  but  when  one  whom I
long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.'
So  the  glad days  passed; and on the  eighth day of May the Riders of
Rohan made ready, and rode off by the North-way, and with them went the
sons
of Elrond. All the road  was lined with people to do them  honour and praise
them, from the Gate of the City  to  the  walls of the  Pelennor.  Then  all
others that dwelt afar went back to their homes  rejoicing; but in the  City
there was  labour of many willing hands to  rebuild  and renew and to remove
all the scars of war and the memory of the darkness.
The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for
Aragorn  was  loth for the fellowship  to be dissolved. 'At  last  all  such
things must end,' he said, 'but I would have you wait a little while longer:
for  the end  of the deeds  that you have  shared in has not yet come. A day
draws near that  I have looked for in all the years of my manhood,  and when
it comes I would have my friends beside me.' But of that day he would say no
more.
In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair house
with Gandalf,  and  they went to and fro as  they  wished. And Frodo said to
Gandalf:  'Do you know what this  day is that  Aragorn speaks of? For we are
happy here, and I don't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo
is waiting; and the Shire is my home.'
'As for  Bilbo,' said Gandalf, 'he is waiting for the same day, and  he
knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May
and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if
an  age of the world had gone by,  yet to the trees and the grass it is less
than a year since you set out.'
'Pippin,' said Frodo, 'didn't you say  that Gandalf was less close than
of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.'
And Gandalf said: 'Many folk  like to know beforehand what is to be set
on the table; but those who have laboured  to prepare the feast like to keep
their secret;  for  wonder makes the words of  praise  louder.  And  Aragorn
himself waits for a sign.'
There came a day when Gandalf could not  be  found, and  the Companions
