Pippin noticed it. 'It  has not taken you long to lose  us,' he said. But at
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead.
'Well, well!'  he  said. 'These trees      do    shift.  There is the  Bonfire
Glade in front of  us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved
away!'
The light grew clearer as they  went forward. Suddenly they came out of
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above
them, blue and clear to  their surprise, for down under the Forest-roof they
had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The
sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet to shine down into the clearing,
though its light was on  the  tree-tops. The  leaves  were  all  thicker and
greener about  the edges of  the  glade, enclosing  it with  an almost solid
wall. No tree grew there, only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky  and
faded hemlocks  and wood-parsley,  fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes,  and
rampant nettles and  thistles.  A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and
cheerful garden after the close Forest.
The hobbits  felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening
daylight in the  sky. At the far side  of the glade there was a break in the
wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on into
the wood, wide  in places  and open  above, though  every  now and again the
trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path  they
rode. They were  still climbing gently, but they now  went much quicker, and
with better heart;  for it seemed to them that the  Forest had relented, and
was going to let them pass unhindered after all.
But after a while the air began to get  hot and stuffy. The  trees drew
close again  on either side, and they  could  no longer  see far ahead.  Now
stronger than ever they  felt again  the ill will  of  the  wood pressing on
them.  So silent was it that  the fall of their ponies'  hoofs, rustling  on
dead leaves and  occasionally  stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud  in
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank
to a murmur.
O! Wanderers in the shadowed land
despair not! For though dark they stand,
all woods there be must end at last,
and see the open sun go past:
the setting sun, the rising sun,
the day's end, or the day begun.
For east or west all woods must fail        ...
Fail -  even as he said the word his voice faded  into  silence. The air
seemed  heavy and the making  of  words wearisome. Just behind them  a large
branch fell from an  old overhanging tree with  a crash into  the  path. The
trees seemed to close in before them.
'They  do not  like all that about ending and failing,' said  Merry. 'I
should not sing any  more  at present. Wait till we do  get to the edge, and
then we'll turn and give them a rousing chorus!'
He spoke cheerfully, and if  he felt any great anxiety, he did not show
it. The  others did not  answer.  They were depressed.  A heavy  weight  was
settling steadily  on  Frodo's  heart, and he regretted now with every  step
forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace  of the trees. He
was, indeed,  just  about  to stop and propose going back (if that was still
possible), when  things took  a  new  turn. The  path  stopped climbing, and
became for a while nearly  level. The dark trees drew aside, and  ahead they
could see  the path  going  almost  straight forward.  Before them, but some
distance off, there stood a  green  hill-top, treeless, rising  like a  bald
head out of the  encircling wood. The  path seemed to be making directly for
it.
They now hurried forward again,  delighted with the thought of climbing
out  for  a  while above the roof  of the Forest. The path dipped, and  then
again began  to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep
hillside.  There  it left the trees and faded into the turf.  The wood stood
all round the hill like  thick  hair that ended sharply in  a circle round a
shaven crown.
The hobbits  led their  ponies up, winding  round and  round until they
reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The air was gleaming
and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near  at
hand the mist was now almost gone;  though here and there it lay  in hollows
of the wood, and to  the south  of  them, out of a deep  fold cutting  right
across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.
'That,'  said Merry, pointing  with his hand, 'that  is the line of the
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through
the
midst of the  Forest to join the  Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to
go  that  way! The Withywindle valley is said to be  the  queerest part of the
whole wood - the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.'
The others looked in the  direction  that  Merry  pointed out, but they
could see little but mists over the damp and  deep-cut valley; and beyond it
the southern half of the Forest faded from view.
The sun on the hill-lop was now  getting  hot. It must  have been about
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in
other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the
Hedge  or  the  valley of  the Brandywine  beyond  it. Northward, where they
looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of  the
great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea
of trees, and the horizon was veiled.
On the south-eastern  side  the ground fell very  steeply,  as  if  the
slopes  of  the  hill   were  continued  far  down  under  the  trees,  like
island-shores that really  are the  sides  of a mountain rising  out of deep
waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them,
while they ate their  mid-day meal. As  the sun rose  and  passed  noon they
glimpsed far  off  in  the east the grey-green lines  of the Downs  that lay
beyond  the Old Forest on that side. That cheered them greatly; for  it  was
good to see a sight of anything beyond the  wood's borders,  though they did
not mean to go  that way,  if  they  could help it: the Barrow-downs  had as
sinister a reputation in hobbit-legend as the Forest itself.
At length they made up their minds  to go on again. The path  that  had
brought them to the hill reappeared on  the northward side; but they had not
followed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to the
right.  Soon it  began  to descend  rapidly and they  guessed  that  it must
actually be heading towards the Withywindle valley: not at all the direction
they  wished  lo  take. After some  discussion  they decided to  leave  this
misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to
see it  from the hill-top, the Road  must lie that way, and it  could not be
many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed
lo  be drier  and more  open,  climbing up to slopes  where  the  trees were
thinner,  and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes  and other  strange
and nameless trees of the denser wood.
At first  their  choice  seemed  to  be good: they got along  at a fair
speed, though whenever they got  a glimpse of the sun  in an open glade they
seemed  unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But  after a time the  trees
began to close in again,  just where they had appeared from a distance to be
thinner and  less tangled. Then  deep  folds  in  the ground were discovered
