return for him; but here let him sleep a while.'
And Jowyn  said to Faramir: 'Now I must go back to my own land and look
on it once again, and help my brother in his labour;  but  when  one  whom I
long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.'
So  the  glad days  passed; and on the  eighth day of May the Riders of
Rohan made ready, and rode off by the North-way, and with them went the
sons
of Elrond. All the road  was lined with people to do them  honour and praise
them, from the Gate of the City  to  the  walls of the  Pelennor.  Then  all
others that dwelt afar went back to their homes  rejoicing; but in the  City
there was  labour of many willing hands to  rebuild  and renew and to remove
all the scars of war and the memory of the darkness.
The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for
Aragorn  was  loth for the fellowship  to be dissolved. 'At  last  all  such
things must end,' he said, 'but I would have you wait a little while longer:
for  the end  of the deeds  that you have  shared in has not yet come. A day
draws near that  I have looked for in all the years of my manhood,  and when
it comes I would have my friends beside me.' But of that day he would say no
more.
In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair house
with Gandalf,  and  they went to and fro as  they  wished. And Frodo said to
Gandalf:  'Do you know what this  day is that  Aragorn speaks of? For we are
happy here, and I don't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo
is waiting; and the Shire is my home.'
'As for  Bilbo,' said Gandalf, 'he is waiting for the same day, and  he
knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May
and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if
an  age of the world had gone by,  yet to the trees and the grass it is less
than a year since you set out.'
'Pippin,' said Frodo, 'didn't you say  that Gandalf was less close than
of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.'
And Gandalf said: 'Many folk  like to know beforehand what is to be set
on the table; but those who have laboured  to prepare the feast like to keep
their secret;  for  wonder makes the words of  praise  louder.  And  Aragorn
himself waits for a sign.'
There came a day when Gandalf could not  be  found, and  the Companions
wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took Aragorn  out from the
City
by night, and he brought him to the  southern feet  of Mount Mindolluin; and
there they found a path made  in ages  past that few now dared to tread. For
it led up on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had  been
wont to go. And they went up by steep ways,  until they came to a high field
below  the  snows that clad the  lofty peaks, and it  looked down  over  the
precipice that stood behind the  City. And standing there they  surveyed the
lands, for the  morning  was come; and they saw the towers  of the  City far
below  them  like white pencils touched by the sunlight, and all the Vale of
Anduin was like a  garden, and  the  Mountains  of Shadow  were veiled in  a
golden mist. Upon the one side their  sight reached  to the grey Emyn  Muil,
and  the  glint of  Rauros was like a star twinkling far  off; and upon  the
other  side they  saw  the River like  a ribbon  laid down to Pelargir,  and
beyond that was a light on the hem of the sky that spoke of the Sea.
And Gandalf said: 'This  is  your realm, and  the heart  of the greater
realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is
begun; and it is your  task to order its beginning  and to preserve what may
be preserved. For though much has been  saved, much must  now pass away;
and
the power  of the Three Rings also is ended. And all the lands that you see,
and those that lie round about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time
comes of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.'
'I  know it well, dear  friend,' said Aragorn; 'but I would still  have
your counsel.'
'Not for long now,' said Gandalf. 'The Third Age  was my age. I was the
Enemy of Sauron; and my work  is finished. I shall go soon. The  burden must
lie now upon you and your kindred.'
'But I  shall die,' said Aragorn. 'For  I  am a mortal man, and  though
being what I am and of the race of the West unmingled, I shall have life far
longer than other  men,  yet that is but a little while;  and when those who
are now in the wombs of women are  born and have grown old, I too shall grow
old.  And who then shall govern Gondor and those who look to this City as to
their queen,  if my  desire be  not  granted? The Tree in the Court  of  the
Fountain is still withered and barren. When shall  I see a sign that it will
ever be otherwise?'
'Turn your face from the  green world, and look where all seems  barren
and cold!' said Gandalf.
Then Aragorn  turned. and there was  a  stony  slope behind him running
down from  the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he  was aware that alone
there in the waste a growing thing stood. And he climbed to it, and saw that
out of  the very edge  of the snow there sprang a sapling tree no  more than
three  foot  high. Already it had  put forth young  leaves long and shapely,
dark above and silver beneath,  and upon its slender crown it bore one small
cluster of flowers whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow.
Then Aragorn cried:  '      Yj! ut®vienyes!     I  have found it!  Lo! here is  a
scion  of the Eldest of Trees!  But how comes it here? For it  is not itself
yet seven years old.'
And Gandalf coming looked at it, and said: 'Verily this is a sapling of
the line of  Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling  of Galathilion,  and
that a fruit of Telperion of  many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how
it comes here  in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere
the kings  failed or the Tree  withered in the court, a fruit must have been
set here.  For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to
ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years,
and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if
ever  a fruit ripens,  it should  be planted, lest  the  line die out of the
world. Here it has lain. hidden on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil
lay hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older  far
than your line, King Elessar.'
Then Aragorn laid his hand  gently to the sapling, and lo! it seemed to
hold only lightly to the earth, and it was removed without hurt; and Aragorn
bore it back  to  the Citadel. Then the withered tree was uprooted, but with
reverence; and they did not burn it, but laid it  to rest in the silence  of
Rath Dnnen. And Aragorn planted the new tree in the  court by the  fountain,
and swiftly and gladly it began to grow; and when the month  of June entered
in it was laden with blossom.
'The sign has been given,'  said Aragorn, 'and the day is not far off.'
And he set watchmen upon the walls.
It was the day  before Midsummer  when messengers came from Amon D(n
to
the  City,  and  they said that there was a  riding of fair folk out of  the
North,  and they drew near now to  the walls of the Pelennor. And  the  King
said: 'At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!'
