and cold!' said Gandalf.
Then Aragorn  turned. and there was  a  stony  slope behind him running
down from  the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he  was aware that alone
there in the waste a growing thing stood. And he climbed to it, and saw that
out of  the very edge  of the snow there sprang a sapling tree no  more than
three  foot  high. Already it had  put forth young  leaves long and shapely,
dark above and silver beneath,  and upon its slender crown it bore one small
cluster of flowers whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow.
Then Aragorn cried:  '      Yj! ut®vienyes!     I  have found it!  Lo! here is  a
scion  of the Eldest of Trees!  But how comes it here? For it  is not itself
yet seven years old.'
And Gandalf coming looked at it, and said: 'Verily this is a sapling of
the line of  Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling  of Galathilion,  and
that a fruit of Telperion of  many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how
it comes here  in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere
the kings  failed or the Tree  withered in the court, a fruit must have been
set here.  For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to
ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years,
and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if
ever  a fruit ripens,  it should  be planted, lest  the  line die out of the
world. Here it has lain. hidden on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil
lay hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older  far
than your line, King Elessar.'
Then Aragorn laid his hand  gently to the sapling, and lo! it seemed to
hold only lightly to the earth, and it was removed without hurt; and Aragorn
bore it back  to  the Citadel. Then the withered tree was uprooted, but with
reverence; and they did not burn it, but laid it  to rest in the silence  of
Rath Dnnen. And Aragorn planted the new tree in the  court by the  fountain,
and swiftly and gladly it began to grow; and when the month  of June entered
in it was laden with blossom.
'The sign has been given,'  said Aragorn, 'and the day is not far off.'
And he set watchmen upon the walls.
It was the day  before Midsummer  when messengers came from Amon D(n
to
the  City,  and  they said that there was a  riding of fair folk out of  the
North,  and they drew near now to  the walls of the Pelennor. And  the  King
said: 'At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!'
Upon the very Eve of Midsummer, when  the sky  was blue as sapphire and
white stars opened in the East,  but the West was still  golden  and the air
was  cool and  fragrant, the riders came down the North-way to the gates  of
Minas Tirith. First rode Elrohir  and  Elladan with a  banner of silver, and
then  came Glorfindel  and Erestor  and  all the household of Rivendell, and
after them came the Lady Galadriel and Celeborn,  Lord of Lothlurien, riding
upon white steeds and with  them many fair folk of their land,  grey-cloaked
with  white  gems in their hair; and last came Master  Elrond, mighty  among
Elves and Men, bearing the sceptre of Ann®minas,  and beside him upon a
grey
palfrey rode Arwen his daughter, Evenstar of her people.
And Frodo when he saw her come glimmering in the evening, with stars on
her brow and a sweet fragrance about her,  was moved with  great wonder, and
he said to Gandalf: 'At  last I  understand why we  have waited! This is the
ending. Now not day only shall be beloved, but  night too shall be beautiful
and blessed and all its fear pass away!'
Then  the  King welcomed  his  guests, and  they  alighted;  and Elrond
surrendered  the sceptre, and  laid the hand of  his daughter in the hand of
the King, and together they went up into  the  High City,  and all the stars
flowered in the sky.  And  Aragorn the King Elessar wedded Arwen Undumiel
in
the City of the Kings upon the day of Midsummer, and  the tale of their long
waiting and labours was come to fulfilment.
Chapter 6. Many Partings
When the days of rejoicing were over at last the Companions  thought of
returning to their own homes.  And Frodo went to the  King as he was sitting
with the Queen Arwen by  the fountain, and she sang a song of Valinor, while
the Tree grew and blossomed. They welcomed Frodo  and rose to greet him;
and
Aragorn said:
'I  know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to  return to  your
own  home. Well, dearest friend,  the tree grows  best  in the  land of  its
sires; but  for  you in  all  the lands of the  West  there will  ever  be a
welcome. And though your people have had little fame in the  legends  of the
great, they will  now have  more renown than  any wide  realms that  are  no
more.'
'It  is true that  I  wish to  go back to the Shire,' said Frodo.  'But
first I must  go to Rivendell.  For  if there could be anything wanting in a
time so  blessed,  I missed Bilbo;  and  I was  grieved when  among all  the
household of Elrond I saw that he was not come.'
'Do  you wonder at that,  Ring-bearer?' said  Arwen.  'For you know the
power  of that thing  which is now destroyed; and  all that was done by that
power is now passing away. But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than
you.  He is ancient in years now, according to his kind; and  he awaits you,
for he will not again make any long journey save one.'
'Then I beg leave to depart soon,' said Frodo.
'In seven days we will go,' said Aragorn. 'For we  shall ride  with you
far on the road, even as far as  the  country  of Rohan.  In three days  now
Jomer will return hither to bear Thjoden back to rest  in  the Mark, and  we
shall ride  with  him to honour  the fallen.  But now before  you go  I will
confirm the words that Faramir spoke to you, and you are made free  for ever
of the realm of Gondor; and  all your companions likewise. And if there were
any gifts that I could give to match with  your deeds you  should have them;
but whatever you  desire you  shall  take  with you, and  you shall ride  in
honour and arrayed as princes of the land.'
But the  Queen  Arwen  said:  'A  gift I will give  you.  For I  am the
daughter  of Elrond. I shall not  go  with  him now when  he departs to  the
