Chapter 6. Many Partings
When the days of rejoicing were over at last the Companions  thought of
returning to their own homes.  And Frodo went to the  King as he was sitting
with the Queen Arwen by  the fountain, and she sang a song of Valinor, while
the Tree grew and blossomed. They welcomed Frodo  and rose to greet him;
and
Aragorn said:
'I  know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to  return to  your
own  home. Well, dearest friend,  the tree grows  best  in the  land of  its
sires; but  for  you in  all  the lands of the  West  there will  ever  be a
welcome. And though your people have had little fame in the  legends  of the
great, they will  now have  more renown than  any wide  realms that  are  no
more.'
'It  is true that  I  wish to  go back to the Shire,' said Frodo.  'But
first I must  go to Rivendell.  For  if there could be anything wanting in a
time so  blessed,  I missed Bilbo;  and  I was  grieved when  among all  the
household of Elrond I saw that he was not come.'
'Do  you wonder at that,  Ring-bearer?' said  Arwen.  'For you know the
power  of that thing  which is now destroyed; and  all that was done by that
power is now passing away. But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than
you.  He is ancient in years now, according to his kind; and  he awaits you,
for he will not again make any long journey save one.'
'Then I beg leave to depart soon,' said Frodo.
'In seven days we will go,' said Aragorn. 'For we  shall ride  with you
far on the road, even as far as  the  country  of Rohan.  In three days  now
Jomer will return hither to bear Thjoden back to rest  in  the Mark, and  we
shall ride  with  him to honour  the fallen.  But now before  you go  I will
confirm the words that Faramir spoke to you, and you are made free  for ever
of the realm of Gondor; and  all your companions likewise. And if there were
any gifts that I could give to match with  your deeds you  should have them;
but whatever you  desire you  shall  take  with you, and  you shall ride  in
honour and arrayed as princes of the land.'
But the  Queen  Arwen  said:  'A  gift I will give  you.  For I  am the
daughter  of Elrond. I shall not  go  with  him now when  he departs to  the
Havens; for mine is the choice of L®thien, and as she so have I chosen, both
the  sweet  and the bitter. But in  my stead you shall go, Ring-bearer, when
the time  comes, and if you  then desire it. If your hurts grieve you  still
and the memory of  your  burden is heavy, then  you may pass  into the West,
until all your wounds and weariness  are healed. But wear this now in memory
of Elfstone and Evenstar with whom your life has been woven!'
And she took  a white gem like a star that lay upon her  breast hanging
upon a silver chain,  and she  set the chain  about Frodo's neck.  'When the
memory  of the  fear  and  the darkness troubles you,'  she said, 'this will
bring you aid.'
In three days, as the King had said, Jomer  of Rohan came riding to the
City, and with him came an          jored   of the fairest knights  of the Mark. He was
welcomed; and when they sat all  at table in Merethrond,  the  Great Hall of
Feasts, he beheld the beauty of  the ladies that he  saw and was filled with
great  wonder. And before  he went to his rest he sent for Gimli  the Dwarf,
and he said to him: 'Gimli Gluin's son, have you your axe ready?'
'Nay,  lord,' said Gimli, 'but  I  can  speedily fetch it, if there  be
need.'
'You  shall  judge,'  said  Jomer.  'For  there are  certain rash words
concerning the Lady in the Golden  Wood that lie still between us. And now I
have seen her with my eyes.'
'Well, lord,' said Gimli, 'and what say you now?'
'Alas!'  said Jomer. 'I will not say that she  is the fairest lady that
lives.'
'Then I must go for my axe,' said Gimli.
'But first I will  plead this excuse,' said Jomer. 'Had  I seen  her in
other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I will put
Queen Arwen Evenstar first, and I  am ready to do battle on my own part with
any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?'
Then  Gimli bowed low.  'Nay, you are excused  for my  part, lord,'  he
said. 'You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning. And
my heart forebodes that soon it will past away for ever.'
At last  the day of departure came, and a  great and fair  company made
ready to ride  north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor and Rohan  went
to the Hallows and they came  to the tombs in Rath Dnnen, and they bore away
King Thjoden upon  a golden  bier,  and passed through the City  in silence.
Then they laid the bier upon a great wain with  Riders of Rohan all about it
and his banner borne before; and Merry being Thjoden's esquire rode upon the
wain and kept the arms of the king.
For  the  other  Companions steeds  were furnished  according to  their
stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf rode upon
Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of Gondor; and Legolas and
Gimli
as ever rode together upon Arod.
In that riding went  also Queen  Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel with
their  folk,  and Elrond  and his sons; and the princes of Dol Amroth and of
Ithilien, and many captains and knights. Never had any king of the Mark such
company upon the road as went with Thjoden Thengel's  son to the land of his
home.
Without haste and at peace they passed into Anurien,  and they came  to
the  Grey  Wood under Amon  D(n; and  there they heard a sound  as  of drums
beating in the hills, though no living thing could be seen. Then Aragorn let
the trumpets be blown; and heralds cried:
'Behold  the King  Elessar is come! The Forest  of Dr®adan he  gives to
Ghvn-buri-ghvn and to his folk, to be their own  for ever; and hereafter let
no man enter it without their leave!'
Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent.
At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Thjoden passed
through the green  fields of Rohan and  came to Edoras;  and  there they all
rested. The  Golden Hall  was arrayed  with fair hangings and it was  filled
with light, and there was held the highest feast that it had known since the
days of its building. For after three days the Men  of the Mark prepared the
funeral  of Thjoden; and  he was laid in a  house of stone with his arms and
many  other  fair things that  he had possessed,  and over him was raised  a
great mound, covered with green turves of grass and  of white evermind.  And
now there were eight mounds on the east-side of the Barrowfield.
Then the Riders of the King's House  upon white horses rode round about
the barrow and sang together a song of Thjoden Thengel's  son that  Gljowine
his minstrel made,  and he made no  other song after. The slow voices of the
Riders stirred the hearts even of those who did not  know the speech of that
people; but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of
the Mark as they heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and
the voice of Eorl crying  above the battle upon the  Field of Celebrant; and
the  tale  of  the kings rolled on, and the  horn  of Helm  was  loud in the
