and his banner borne before; and Merry being Thjoden's esquire rode upon the
wain and kept the arms of the king.
For  the  other  Companions steeds  were furnished  according to  their
stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf rode upon
Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of Gondor; and Legolas and
Gimli
as ever rode together upon Arod.
In that riding went  also Queen  Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel with
their  folk,  and Elrond  and his sons; and the princes of Dol Amroth and of
Ithilien, and many captains and knights. Never had any king of the Mark such
company upon the road as went with Thjoden Thengel's  son to the land of his
home.
Without haste and at peace they passed into Anurien,  and they came  to
the  Grey  Wood under Amon  D(n; and  there they heard a sound  as  of drums
beating in the hills, though no living thing could be seen. Then Aragorn let
the trumpets be blown; and heralds cried:
'Behold  the King  Elessar is come! The Forest  of Dr®adan he  gives to
Ghvn-buri-ghvn and to his folk, to be their own  for ever; and hereafter let
no man enter it without their leave!'
Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent.
At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Thjoden passed
through the green  fields of Rohan and  came to Edoras;  and  there they all
rested. The  Golden Hall  was arrayed  with fair hangings and it was  filled
with light, and there was held the highest feast that it had known since the
days of its building. For after three days the Men  of the Mark prepared the
funeral  of Thjoden; and  he was laid in a  house of stone with his arms and
many  other  fair things that  he had possessed,  and over him was raised  a
great mound, covered with green turves of grass and  of white evermind.  And
now there were eight mounds on the east-side of the Barrowfield.
Then the Riders of the King's House  upon white horses rode round about
the barrow and sang together a song of Thjoden Thengel's  son that  Gljowine
his minstrel made,  and he made no  other song after. The slow voices of the
Riders stirred the hearts even of those who did not  know the speech of that
people; but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of
the Mark as they heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and
the voice of Eorl crying  above the battle upon the  Field of Celebrant; and
the  tale  of  the kings rolled on, and the  horn  of Helm  was  loud in the
mountains, until the Darkness  came and King Thjoden arose  and rode through
the Shadow  to  the fire,  and died in splendour, even as the Sun, returning
beyond hope, gleamed upon Mindolluin in the morning.
Out of doubt, out of dark, to the day's rising
he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing.
Hope he rekindled, and in hope ended;
over death, over dread, over doom lifted
out of loss, out of life, unto long glory.
But Merry stood at the foot of the green mound,  and he wept, and  when
the song was ended he arose and cried:
'Thjoden King, Thjoden King!  Farewell! As a father you were to me. for
a little while. Farewell!'
When the burial  was  over and the  weeping of  women was stilled,  and
Thjoden was  left  at  last alone in his barrow, then folk gathered  to  the
Golden Hall for the great feast and  put away sorrow;  for Thjoden had lived
to full years  and ended in  honour no  less than the greatest of his sires.
And when the time  came that in the  custom of the Mark they should drink to
the memory of the kings, Jowyn  Lady of Rohan came  forth, golden as the sun
and white as snow, and she bore a filled cup to Jomer.
Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and  named all the names of the
Lords of the Mark in their  order: Eorl the Young;  and Brego builder of the
Hall; and Aldor brother of Baldor the hapless;  and Frja, and  Frjawine, and
Goldwine, and Djor, and Gram; and Helm who lay  hid in Helm's Deep when
the
Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that
time the  line  was  broken,  and after came  the  mounds of the  east-side:
Frjalaf,  Helm s sister-son, and  Ljofa, and Walda, and Folca, and Folcwine,
and Fengel, and Thengel, and Thjoden the latest. And when Thjoden  was
named
Jomer drained the  cup. Then Jowyn bade those  that served to fill the cups,
and all  there assembled rose  and  drank to the  new  king, crying:  'Hail,
Jomer, King of the Mark!'
At the  last when the  feast drew to an end Jomer arose and  said: 'Now
this is the funeral feast of Thjoden the King; but I will speak ere we go of
tidings of joy,  for  he would not grudge that I should do so, since he  was
ever a father of Jowyn my sister. Hear then all my guests, fair folk of many
realms, such  as  have never before  been gathered  in  this  hall! Faramir,
Steward  of  Gondor, and Prince of  Ithilien, asks that  Jowyn Lady of Rohan
should be his wife,  and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be
trothplighted before you all.'
And Faramir and Jowyn stood  forth and set hand in  hand; and all there
drank to them  and were glad. 'Thus,'  said Jomer, 'is the friendship of the
Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.'
'No niggard are you, Jomer,' said Aragorn, 'to give  thus to Gondor the
fairest thing in your realm!'
Then Jowyn looked in the eyes of Aragorn, and  she said: 'Wish  me joy,
my liege-lord and healer!'
And he answered: 'I have wished  thee joy  ever since first I saw thee.
It heals my heart to see thee now in bliss.'
When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King Jomer.
Aragorn and his knights, and  the people  of Lurien  and of Rivendell,  made
ready  to  ride;  but Faramir  and Imrahil  remained  at  Edoras; and  Arwen
Evenstar remained also, and she said farewell  to her brethren. None saw her
last meeting with Elrond  her father, for  they went up into the  hills  and
there  spoke long together, and bitter was  their parting that should endure
beyond the ends of the world.
At the last  before the guests set oat Jomer and  Jowyn came to  Merry,
and  they said: 'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the  Shire  and Holdwine  of  the
Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!'
And Jomer said: 'Kings of  old would  have laden you  with gifts that a
wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet  you
will take  naught,  you say, but the  arms that  were given to you.  This  I
suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is  worthy; but my sister begs you to
receive this small thing, as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns  of the
Mark at the coming of the morning.'
Then  Jowyn gave to Merry  an ancient horn, small but cunningly wrought
all of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had engraven upon it
swift horsemen riding in  a  line  that  wound about it from the tip  to the
mouth; and there were set runes of great virtue.
'This is  an  heirloom of  our house,' said Jowyn. 'It was made  by the
Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the  Worm. Eorl the Young
brought
it from the North. He that blows it  at need shall set fear in the hearts of
his enemies and joy in the hearts of  his friends, and they  shall hear  him
