Steward  of  Gondor, and Prince of  Ithilien, asks that  Jowyn Lady of Rohan
should be his wife,  and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be
trothplighted before you all.'
And Faramir and Jowyn stood  forth and set hand in  hand; and all there
drank to them  and were glad. 'Thus,'  said Jomer, 'is the friendship of the
Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.'
'No niggard are you, Jomer,' said Aragorn, 'to give  thus to Gondor the
fairest thing in your realm!'
Then Jowyn looked in the eyes of Aragorn, and  she said: 'Wish  me joy,
my liege-lord and healer!'
And he answered: 'I have wished  thee joy  ever since first I saw thee.
It heals my heart to see thee now in bliss.'
When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King Jomer.
Aragorn and his knights, and  the people  of Lurien  and of Rivendell,  made
ready  to  ride;  but Faramir  and Imrahil  remained  at  Edoras; and  Arwen
Evenstar remained also, and she said farewell  to her brethren. None saw her
last meeting with Elrond  her father, for  they went up into the  hills  and
there  spoke long together, and bitter was  their parting that should endure
beyond the ends of the world.
At the last  before the guests set oat Jomer and  Jowyn came to  Merry,
and  they said: 'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the  Shire  and Holdwine  of  the
Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!'
And Jomer said: 'Kings of  old would  have laden you  with gifts that a
wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet  you
will take  naught,  you say, but the  arms that  were given to you.  This  I
suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is  worthy; but my sister begs you to
receive this small thing, as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns  of the
Mark at the coming of the morning.'
Then  Jowyn gave to Merry  an ancient horn, small but cunningly wrought
all of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had engraven upon it
swift horsemen riding in  a  line  that  wound about it from the tip  to the
mouth; and there were set runes of great virtue.
'This is  an  heirloom of  our house,' said Jowyn. 'It was made  by the
Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the  Worm. Eorl the Young
brought
it from the North. He that blows it  at need shall set fear in the hearts of
his enemies and joy in the hearts of  his friends, and they  shall hear  him
and come to him.'
Then Merry  took  the  horn, for it could not be refused, and he kissed
Jowyn's hand; and they embraced him, and so they parted for that time.
Now the guests were  ready,  and  they drank the stirrup-cup, and  with
great praise  and friendship they departed, and  came at  length  to  Helm's
Deep, and there they rested two  days. Then Legolas  repaid  his  promise to
Gimli and went with him to the  Glittering Caves;  and when they returned he
was silent, and  would  say only that Gimli  alone could find fit  words  to
speak of them. 'And never  before has  a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf
in a contest of words,' said he. 'Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set
the score right!'
From  Deeping-coomb  they rode to Isengard,  and saw  how the Ents  had
busied  themselves. All the stone-circle had been  thrown down and  removed,
and  the land within was made into a garden  filled with orchards and trees,
and a stream  ran through  it;  but in  the midst of all there was a lake of
clear  water, and out of it  the  Tower  of  Orthanc  rose  still, tall  and
impregnable, and its black rock was mirrored in the pool.
For a while the travellers sat where once the old gates of Isengard had
stood, and there were now two tall trees like sentinels  at the beginning of
a green-bordered path that ran towards Orthanc; and they looked in wonder at
the work that had been done, but no living thing could they see far or near.
,
But presently they heard a voice calling            hoom-hom hoom-hom            ;  and there
came
Treebeard striding down the path to greet them with Quickbeam at his side.
'Welcome to the  Treegarth of Orthanc!' he said. 'I  knew that you were
coming, but I was at work up the valley; there is much still to be done. But
you  have  not been idle  either away in the south and the east, I hear; and
all that I hear is good, very good.' Then Treebeard praised all their deeds,
of which he seemed to have full knowledge; and at last he stopped and looked
long at Gandalf.
'Well, come  now!' he said.  'You  have proved mightiest,  and all your
labours have gone well.  Where now would you be  going? And why  do you
come
here?'
'To see how your work goes, my friend,' said Gandalf, 'and to thank you
for your aid in all that has been achieved.'
'Hoom  , well, that is fair enough,' said Treebeard; 'for to be sure Ents
have played  their  part. And  not  only in  dealing with that,               hoom    ,  that
accursed tree-slayer that dwelt here. For there was a great inrush of those,
burbrum     ,   those  evileyed  -  blackhanded  -  bowlegged  -  flinthearted  -
,
clawfingered  - foulbellied -  bloodthirsty,           morimaite - sincahonda hoom              ,
well, since  you are  hasty folk and their full name is as long as  years of
torment, those vermin  of orcs; and they came  over  the River and down from
the  North and all round the wood of  Laurelindurenan, which they could  not
get into, thanks  to the Great ones who  are here.' He bowed to the Lord and
Lady of Lurien.
'And these same foul creatures were more than  surprised to meet us out
on the Wold, for they had  not heard of us before; though that might be said
also of better folk. And not many  will remember us, for not many escaped us
alive, and the River had most of those. But it was well for you, for if they
had  not met us,  then the king of the grassland would not have  ridden far,
and if he had there would have been no home to return to.'
'We know it  well,' said Aragorn, 'and never  shall it be forgotten  in
Minas Tirith or in Edoras.'
' Never  is too long a word even for me,' said Treebeard. 'Not while your
kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed to seem long
to Ents.'
'The New Age begins,' said Gandalf, 'and in this age it may  well prove
that the  kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend. But now come
tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is Saruman? Is he not weary of
Orthanc yet? For I do  not suppose that he will think you  have improved the
view from his windows.'
Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look, a most cunning look, Merry thought.
'Ah!'  he said.  'I thought you would come to  that. Weary of  Orthanc? Very
weary  at last; but  not so weary of his tower as he  was weary of my voice.
Hoom    ! I gave  him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in
your speech.'
'Then why  did he  stay  to  listen?  Did  you go into  Orthanc?' asked
Gandalf.
'Hoom  ,  no, not  into Orthanc!'  said  Treebeard. 'But he came  to  his
window and listened,  because he could  not get news in any  other  way, and
though he hated the news, he was greedy to have it; and  I saw that he heard
it all. But I added a great many things to the news that it was good for him
to think of. He grew very weary. He always was hasty. That was his ruin.'
