have played  their  part. And  not  only in  dealing with that,               hoom    ,  that
accursed tree-slayer that dwelt here. For there was a great inrush of those,
burbrum     ,   those  evileyed  -  blackhanded  -  bowlegged  -  flinthearted  -
,
clawfingered  - foulbellied -  bloodthirsty,           morimaite - sincahonda hoom              ,
well, since  you are  hasty folk and their full name is as long as  years of
torment, those vermin  of orcs; and they came  over  the River and down from
the  North and all round the wood of  Laurelindurenan, which they could  not
get into, thanks  to the Great ones who  are here.' He bowed to the Lord and
Lady of Lurien.
'And these same foul creatures were more than  surprised to meet us out
on the Wold, for they had  not heard of us before; though that might be said
also of better folk. And not many  will remember us, for not many escaped us
alive, and the River had most of those. But it was well for you, for if they
had  not met us,  then the king of the grassland would not have  ridden far,
and if he had there would have been no home to return to.'
'We know it  well,' said Aragorn, 'and never  shall it be forgotten  in
Minas Tirith or in Edoras.'
' Never  is too long a word even for me,' said Treebeard. 'Not while your
kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed to seem long
to Ents.'
'The New Age begins,' said Gandalf, 'and in this age it may  well prove
that the  kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend. But now come
tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is Saruman? Is he not weary of
Orthanc yet? For I do  not suppose that he will think you  have improved the
view from his windows.'
Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look, a most cunning look, Merry thought.
'Ah!'  he said.  'I thought you would come to  that. Weary of  Orthanc? Very
weary  at last; but  not so weary of his tower as he  was weary of my voice.
Hoom    ! I gave  him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in
your speech.'
'Then why  did he  stay  to  listen?  Did  you go into  Orthanc?' asked
Gandalf.
'Hoom  ,  no, not  into Orthanc!'  said  Treebeard. 'But he came  to  his
window and listened,  because he could  not get news in any  other  way, and
though he hated the news, he was greedy to have it; and  I saw that he heard
it all. But I added a great many things to the news that it was good for him
to think of. He grew very weary. He always was hasty. That was his ruin.'
'l  observe, my good  Fangorn,' said Gandalf, 'that with great care you
is
,
say  dwelt was grew        . What about  ? Is he dead?'
,
'No, not dead, so far as I know,' said Treebeard. 'But he is gone. Yes,
he is gone seven days.  I let him go.  There  was little left of him when he
crawled  out,  and as  for  that worm-creature of his,  he was  like  a pale
shadow. Now do not tell me, Gandalf, that I promised to keep him safe; for I
know it.  But things have changed since then.  And  I kept him until  he was
safe, safe from doing any  more harm. You should know that above all  I hate
the  caging of live things, and I will not keep even such creatures as these
caged beyond great need. A snake without fangs may crawl where he will.'
'You may be right,'  said Gandalf; 'but this snake  had still one tooth
left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he persuaded
you, even you Treebeard,  knowing the soft spot in your heart.  Well,  he is
gone, and there is no more to be said.  But the Tower  of  Orthanc now  goes
back to the King, to whom it belongs. Though maybe he will not need it.'
'That  will  be seen later,' said Aragorn. 'But I will give to Ents all
this valley  to  do with as they will, so long  as  they  keep a watch  upon
Orthanc and see that none enter it without my leave.'
'It is locked,' said Treebeard. 'I made Saruman lock it and give me the
keys. Quickbeam has them.'
Quickbeam  bowed like a tree bending in the wind and  handed to Aragorn
two great black keys of intricate shape, joined by a  ring of steel.  'Now I
thank you once more,' said Aragorn, 'and I bid you farewell. May your forest
grow again in peace. When  this valley is filled there  is room and to spare
west of the mountains, where once you walked long ago.'
Treebeard's face became sad. 'Forests may  grow,' he  said.  'Woods may
spread. But not Ents. There are no Entings.'
'Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search,' said Aragorn. 'Lands
will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed.'
But  Treebeard shook his head and said: 'It is far to go. And there are
too  many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting  my manners! Will you
stay here and rest a  while? And maybe there are  some that would be pleased
to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?' He looked at
Celeborn and Galadriel.
But  all  save Legolas said  that they  must  now take  their leave and
depart, either south or west. 'Come, Gimli!' said Legolas. 'Now by Fangorn's
leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and  see such trees as are
nowhere  else  to be found in Middle-earth. You  shall come with me and keep
your word; and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood
and beyond.' To this Gimli agreed, though with no great delight, it seemed.
'Here  then  at last comes the ending of the Fellowship  of  the Ring,'
said Aragorn. 'Yet I hope that ere long you will  return to my land with the
help that you promised.'
'We will come, if our own lords allow it,' said Gimli. 'Well, farewell.
my hobbits! You  should  come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be
kept  awake for fear  of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some
of us  may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all  be  gathered
together ever again.'
Then Treebeard  said farewell to  each of  them  in turn, and  he bowed
three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and  Galadriel.  'It
,
is long,  long since we  met by stock  or by  stone,             A  vanimar vanimblion
nostari!  ' he said. 'It is sad that we should meet only  thus at  the ending.
For the world is changing: I  feel it in the  water, I feel it in the earth,
and I smell it in the air. I do not think we shall meet again.'
And Celeborn said: 'I do not know, Eldest.' But Galadriel said: 'Not in
Middle-earth, nor  until the lands  that lie  under the wave  are lifted  up
again. Then in the  willow-meads  of  Tasarinan we may meet in  the  Spring.
Farewell!'
Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the  old Ent, and he grew
gayer as he looked at  them. 'Well, my merry folk,' he said, 'will you drink
another draught with me before you go?'
'Indeed we  will,' they said,  and he took them aside into the shade of
one  of the trees, and there they saw that  a  great stone jar had been set.
And Treebeard  filled  three bowls, and they drank; and they saw his strange
eyes looking at them over the  rim of his bowl. 'Take  care take  care!'  he
said. 'For you have already grown  since I saw you last.'  And  they laughed
and drained their bowls.
'Well, good-bye!' he said. 'And don't forget  that if you hear any news
of the Entwives in your land, you  will send word to me.'  Then he waved his
great hands to all the company and went off into the trees.
The  travellers now  rode with more  speed,  and  they made  their  way
towards  the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave  of them at last  close to
that  very place where  Pippin had looked  into  the Stone  of  Orthanc. The
