nowhere  else  to be found in Middle-earth. You  shall come with me and keep
your word; and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood
and beyond.' To this Gimli agreed, though with no great delight, it seemed.
'Here  then  at last comes the ending of the Fellowship  of  the Ring,'
said Aragorn. 'Yet I hope that ere long you will  return to my land with the
help that you promised.'
'We will come, if our own lords allow it,' said Gimli. 'Well, farewell.
my hobbits! You  should  come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be
kept  awake for fear  of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some
of us  may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all  be  gathered
together ever again.'
Then Treebeard  said farewell to  each of  them  in turn, and  he bowed
three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and  Galadriel.  'It
,
is long,  long since we  met by stock  or by  stone,             A  vanimar vanimblion
nostari!  ' he said. 'It is sad that we should meet only  thus at  the ending.
For the world is changing: I  feel it in the  water, I feel it in the earth,
and I smell it in the air. I do not think we shall meet again.'
And Celeborn said: 'I do not know, Eldest.' But Galadriel said: 'Not in
Middle-earth, nor  until the lands  that lie  under the wave  are lifted  up
again. Then in the  willow-meads  of  Tasarinan we may meet in  the  Spring.
Farewell!'
Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the  old Ent, and he grew
gayer as he looked at  them. 'Well, my merry folk,' he said, 'will you drink
another draught with me before you go?'
'Indeed we  will,' they said,  and he took them aside into the shade of
one  of the trees, and there they saw that  a  great stone jar had been set.
And Treebeard  filled  three bowls, and they drank; and they saw his strange
eyes looking at them over the  rim of his bowl. 'Take  care take  care!'  he
said. 'For you have already grown  since I saw you last.'  And  they laughed
and drained their bowls.
'Well, good-bye!' he said. 'And don't forget  that if you hear any news
of the Entwives in your land, you  will send word to me.'  Then he waved his
great hands to all the company and went off into the trees.
The  travellers now  rode with more  speed,  and  they made  their  way
towards  the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave  of them at last  close to
that  very place where  Pippin had looked  into  the Stone  of  Orthanc. The
Hobbits were grieved at this parting; for Aragorn had never failed  them and
he had been their guide through many perils.
'I wish  we  could have a Stone that  we could see all our friends in,'
said Pippin, 'and that we could speak to them from far away!'
'Only  one  now remains  that you could use,'  answered Aragorn for you
would not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you. But the
Palantnr of Orthanc the King will keep, to see what is passing in his realm,
and what his servants are doing. For do not forget, Peregrin Took, that  you
are a knight  of Gondor, and I do not release you from your service. You are
going now on leave, but I may recall you.  And remember, dear friends of the
Shire, that my realm  lies  also in the  North, and I shall  come there  one
day.'
Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady said to
him: 'Elfstone,  through  darkness  you have come to your hope, and have now
all your desire. Use well the days!'
But  Celeborn  said: 'Kinsman,  farewell! May  your doom be  other than
mine, and your treasure remain with you to the end!'
With that they parted,  and  it was then the  time  of sunset; and when
after  a  while  they turned and looked back,  they saw the King of the West
sitting upon his horse with his knights about him; and the falling Sun shone
upon them and made all  their harness to gleam like red gold,  and the white
mantle of Aragorn  was turned  to a flame. Then Aragorn took the green stone
and held it up, and there came a green fire from his hand.
Soon the dwindling company, following the  Isen,  turned west  and rode
through  the  Gap  into  the  waste  lands  beyond,  and  then  they  turned
northwards, and passed over the borders of Dunland. The Dunlendings fled and
hid themselves, for they were afraid of Elvish Folk,  though few indeed ever
came to  their country; but the travellers  did not heed them, for they were
still a great company and were well provided  with all that they needed; and
they went  on  their way at their leisure, setting  up their tents when they
would.
On the  sixth day  since their  parting  from the  King  they journeyed
through  a wood  climbing  down from the  hills  at the  feet  of the  Misty
Mountains that now marched on their right hand. As they came out  again into
the open country at sundown they overtook an old man leaning on a staff, and
he was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white, and at his heels went another
beggar, slouching and whining.
'Well Saruman!' said Gandalf. 'Where are you going?'
'What is  that to you?' he answered. 'Will you  still  order my goings,
and are you not content with my ruin?'
'You know the  answers,' said Gandalf: 'no and no. But in  any case the
time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If
you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen  him, and he would have
shown
you wisdom and mercy.'
'Then all the A more reason  to have left sooner,' said Saruman; 'for I
desire  neither  of  him.  Indeed if  you wish for  an answer  to your first
question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.'
'Then once  more you are going the wrong way,' said Gandalf, 'and I see
no hope in your journey.  But  will  you scorn our help?  For we offer it to
you.'
'To  me?' said  Saruman. 'Nay, pray do not smile  at me! I prefer  your
frowns. And as  for the Lady here, I do not trust her:  she always hated me,
and schemed  for your part. I do not doubt that she has brought you this way
to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty. Had  I been warned of your
pursuit, I would have denied you the pleasure.'
'Saruman,' said Galadriel, 'we have other errands  and other cares that
seem  to us more  urgent  than  hunting  for  you. Say rather  that  you are
overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.'
'If it be truly the last, I am glad,'  said  Saruman;  'for I shall  be
spared the  trouble of  refusing it  again. All  my hopes are ruined,  but I
would not share yours. If you have any.'
For  a  moment his eyes kindled. 'Go!'  he said. 'I did  not spend long
study on these matters for naught. You have  doomed yourselves, and you
know
it. And it will afford me  some comfort as I wander to think that you pulled
down your own house  when you destroyed  mine. And now, what  ship will
bear
you back across so wide a sea?' he mocked. 'It will be a grey ship, and full
of ghosts.' He laughed, but his voice was cracked and hideous.
'Get up, you  idiot!' he shouted to the other  beggar, who had sat down
on the ground; and  he struck him with his staff. 'Turn about! If these fine
folk are going our way, then we will  take another. Get on, or I'll give you
no crust for your supper!'
