'Well Saruman!' said Gandalf. 'Where are you going?'
'What is  that to you?' he answered. 'Will you  still  order my goings,
and are you not content with my ruin?'
'You know the  answers,' said Gandalf: 'no and no. But in  any case the
time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If
you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen  him, and he would have
shown
you wisdom and mercy.'
'Then all the A more reason  to have left sooner,' said Saruman; 'for I
desire  neither  of  him.  Indeed if  you wish for  an answer  to your first
question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.'
'Then once  more you are going the wrong way,' said Gandalf, 'and I see
no hope in your journey.  But  will  you scorn our help?  For we offer it to
you.'
'To  me?' said  Saruman. 'Nay, pray do not smile  at me! I prefer  your
frowns. And as  for the Lady here, I do not trust her:  she always hated me,
and schemed  for your part. I do not doubt that she has brought you this way
to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty. Had  I been warned of your
pursuit, I would have denied you the pleasure.'
'Saruman,' said Galadriel, 'we have other errands  and other cares that
seem  to us more  urgent  than  hunting  for  you. Say rather  that  you are
overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.'
'If it be truly the last, I am glad,'  said  Saruman;  'for I shall  be
spared the  trouble of  refusing it  again. All  my hopes are ruined,  but I
would not share yours. If you have any.'
For  a  moment his eyes kindled. 'Go!'  he said. 'I did  not spend long
study on these matters for naught. You have  doomed yourselves, and you
know
it. And it will afford me  some comfort as I wander to think that you pulled
down your own house  when you destroyed  mine. And now, what  ship will
bear
you back across so wide a sea?' he mocked. 'It will be a grey ship, and full
of ghosts.' He laughed, but his voice was cracked and hideous.
'Get up, you  idiot!' he shouted to the other  beggar, who had sat down
on the ground; and  he struck him with his staff. 'Turn about! If these fine
folk are going our way, then we will  take another. Get on, or I'll give you
no crust for your supper!'
The beggar  turned and slouched past  whimpering: 'Poor old Grnma! Poor
old Grnma!  Always beaten and cursed. How  I hate him!  I wish I could leave
him!'
'Then leave him!' said Gandalf.
But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of terror at
Gandalf, and then shuffled quickly past behind Saruman. As the wretched pair
passed  by the  company they came  to the hobbits, and Saruman  stopped  and
stared at them; but they looked at him with pity.
'So you have  come  to  gloat too, have you, my urchins?' he said. 'You
don't care what a beggar lacks, do you? For  you have all you want, food and
fine clothes, and the best weed for your pipes. Oh yes, I know! I know where
it comes from. You would not give a pipeful to a beggar, would you?'
'I would, if I had any,' said Frodo.
'You can have what I have  got left,' said Merry,  'if you will wait  a
moment.' He got down and searched  in  the bag at his saddle. Then he handed
to Saruman a leather pouch.  'Take what there is,' he said. 'You are welcome
to it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard.'
'Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought!' cried  Saruman,  clutching  at the
pouch. 'This is only a repayment in token; for you took more, I'll be bound.
Still,  a beggar must  be grateful,  if a thief returns him even a morsel of
his own. Well, it  will serve you right  when you  come  home,  if  you find
things  less good in  the Southfarthing than you  would like. Long  may your
land be short of leaf!'
'Thank you!' said Merry. 'In that case I will have my pouch back, which
is not yours and has journeyed  far with me.  Wrap the weed in a rag of your
own.'
'One thief  deserves  another,' said  Saruman,  and turned his back  on
Merry, and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the wood.
'Well, I  like that!' said Pippin. 'Thief indeed! What of our claim for
waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?'
'Ah!' said Sam. 'And      bought    he said. How,  I  wonder? And I didn't like
the sound of what he said about the Southfarthing. It's time we got back.'
'I'm sure it is,' said Frodo. 'But  we can't go  any quicker, if we are
to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.'
'Yes, I  think  you  had better do that,' said Gandalf. 'But  alas  for
Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altogether.
All the same, I am not sure that  Treebeard  is right: I  fancy he could  do
some mischief still in a small mean way.'
Next day they went on into  northern Dunland, where  no men now  dwelt,
though  it was  a green and pleasant country. September came  in with golden
days  and  silver  nights, and they  rode  at  ease  until  they reached the
Swanfleet  river, and  found the  old ford, east of the  falls where it went
down suddenly into the lowlands. Far to the west in a haze lay the meres and
eyots through which it wound its way to the Greyflood: there countless swans
housed in a land of reeds.
So  they  passed into  Eregion,  and at last  a  fair  morning  dawned,
shimmering above gleaming mists;  and looking from their camp on a  low hill
the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust
up into the sky through floating clouds: Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol.
They were near to the Gates of Moria.
Here  now  for  seven  days they tarried, for the  time was at hand for
another parting which  they  were loth to make.  Soon Celeborn and Galadriel
and their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the Redhorn Gate and down
the  Dimrill Stair to the  Silverlode  and to  their own  country.  They had
journeyed  thus far  by the  west-ways, for  they had  much to speak of with
Elrond and with Gandalf, and here they lingered still in converse with their
friends.  Often long after the hobbits were wrapped in sleep  they would sit
together under  the stars, recalling  the ages that were gone and  all their
joys  and  labours in the world, or holding council, concerning  the days to
come. If any wanderer had chanced  to  pass,  little would he  have seen  or
heard, and it would have seemed to him only that he saw grey figures, carved
in stone, memorials of forgotten  things now  lost in  unpeopled  lands. For
they did  not move or speak with mouth, looking from mind  to mind; and only
their shining eyes stirred and kindled as their thoughts went to and fro.
But at length all was said, and they parted again for a while, until it
was time for  the Three Rings to  pass away. Quickly fading into  the stones
and  the  shadows  the  grey-cloaked  people  of  Lurien  rode  towards  the
mountains;  and  those  who  were going  to  Rivendell sat  on the hill  and
watched,  until there came out of the gathering mist a flash; and  then they
saw no more. Frodo knew that Galadriel  had held aloft her ring  in token of
farewell.
Sam turned away and sighed: 'I wish I was going back to Lurien!'
At last one  evening  they came over  the  high moors, suddenly  as  to
travellers it always seemed,  to  the brink of the  deep valley of Rivendell
