some mischief still in a small mean way.'
Next day they went on into  northern Dunland, where  no men now  dwelt,
though  it was  a green and pleasant country. September came  in with golden
days  and  silver  nights, and they  rode  at  ease  until  they reached the
Swanfleet  river, and  found the  old ford, east of the  falls where it went
down suddenly into the lowlands. Far to the west in a haze lay the meres and
eyots through which it wound its way to the Greyflood: there countless swans
housed in a land of reeds.
So  they  passed into  Eregion,  and at last  a  fair  morning  dawned,
shimmering above gleaming mists;  and looking from their camp on a  low hill
the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust
up into the sky through floating clouds: Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol.
They were near to the Gates of Moria.
Here  now  for  seven  days they tarried, for the  time was at hand for
another parting which  they  were loth to make.  Soon Celeborn and Galadriel
and their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the Redhorn Gate and down
the  Dimrill Stair to the  Silverlode  and to  their own  country.  They had
journeyed  thus far  by the  west-ways, for  they had  much to speak of with
Elrond and with Gandalf, and here they lingered still in converse with their
friends.  Often long after the hobbits were wrapped in sleep  they would sit
together under  the stars, recalling  the ages that were gone and  all their
joys  and  labours in the world, or holding council, concerning  the days to
come. If any wanderer had chanced  to  pass,  little would he  have seen  or
heard, and it would have seemed to him only that he saw grey figures, carved
in stone, memorials of forgotten  things now  lost in  unpeopled  lands. For
they did  not move or speak with mouth, looking from mind  to mind; and only
their shining eyes stirred and kindled as their thoughts went to and fro.
But at length all was said, and they parted again for a while, until it
was time for  the Three Rings to  pass away. Quickly fading into  the stones
and  the  shadows  the  grey-cloaked  people  of  Lurien  rode  towards  the
mountains;  and  those  who  were going  to  Rivendell sat  on the hill  and
watched,  until there came out of the gathering mist a flash; and  then they
saw no more. Frodo knew that Galadriel  had held aloft her ring  in token of
farewell.
Sam turned away and sighed: 'I wish I was going back to Lurien!'
At last one  evening  they came over  the  high moors, suddenly  as  to
travellers it always seemed,  to  the brink of the  deep valley of Rivendell
and saw far below the lamps  shining  in Elrond's house. And they went  down
and crossed the bridge and came to  the doors,  and all the house was filled
with light and song for joy at Elrond's homecoming.
First of  all, before  they  had  eaten or  washed  or even shed  their
cloaks, the hobbits went in search of Bilbo. They found him all alone in his
little room. It was littered with papers and pens and pencils; but Bilbo was
sitting in  a  chair before  a small  bright fire. He looked  very old,  but
peaceful, and sleepy.
He  opened his eyes and  looked up as they came in. 'Hullo, hullo!'  he
said. 'So you've  come back? And  tomorrow's my birthday, too. How clever of
you! Do you know,  I shall  be one hundred and twenty-nine? And  in one year
more, if I am spared, I shall equal the Old Took. I should like to beat him;
but we shall see.'
After the celebration  of  Bilbo's birthday  the four hobbits stayed in
Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with  their old friend, who spent
most  of his time  now in his room,  except at meals. For these he was still
very punctual as a rule, and he seldom failed to wake  up in time  for them.
Sitting round the fire they told him in turn all that they could remember of
their journeys and adventures. At first he pretended to take some notes; but
he often fell asleep; and when he  woke  he would  say:  'How splendid!  How
wonderful!  But where were we?'  Then they went  on with  the story from the
point where he had begun to nod.
The only  part that  seemed really to rouse him and  hold his attention
was the account of  the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. 'I was  invited to
the wedding of course,' he said. 'And I have  waited for it long enough. But
somehow, when it came  to it,  I found I had so much to do here; and packing
is such a bother.'
When  nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo  looked out of his window and
saw that  there had been a frost  in the night, and  the  cobwebs were  like
white  nets.  Then  suddenly he knew that he must go,  and  say  good-bye to
Bilbo. The weather  was still calm  and fair, after one  of the  most lovely
summers that people could remember; but October had  come, and it must
break
soon  and begin to rain and blow again. And there was still a very long  way
to go. Yet it was not really the thought of the weather that stirred him. He
had  a feeling  that  it  was time he went back to the Shire. Sam shared it.
Only the night before he had said:
'Well, Mr. Frodo, we've been far and seen a deal, and yet I don't think
we've found a better place than this. There's  something of everything here,
if  you understand me:  the Shire and the Golden Wood and  Gondor and kings'
houses and  inns and  meadows and mountains all mixed.  And  yet, somehow,
I
feel we ought to be going soon. I'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the
truth.'
'Yes,  something  of  everything,  Sam,  except  the  Sea,'  Frodo  had
answered; and he repeated it now to himself: 'Except the Sea.'
That  day  Frodo spoke to Elrond, and  it was  agreed  that they should
leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: 'I think I shall come
too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.'
In  the evening  they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. 'Well, if you must
go, you must,' he said.  'I am sorry.  I shall miss you.  It is nice just to
know that  you are about the  place. But I am getting very sleepy.' Then  he
gave Frodo his mithril-coat  and Sting, forgetting that he had  already done
so;  and  he gave him  also three books of lore that he had made  at various
times,  written  in  his spidery hand,  and labelled  on  their  red  backs:
Translations from the Elvish, by B.B.
To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. 'Almost the last drop of the Smaug
vintage,' he  said.  'May come in  useful,  if you think of getting married,
Sam.' Sam blushed.
'I have nothing  much to give to you young fellows,' he said  to  Merry
and Pippin, 'except  good advice.'  And when he had given them a fair sample
of  this, he added a last item in Shire-fashion:  'Don't let your heads  get
too big for  your hats! But  if you don't  finish growing  up soon,  you are
going to find hats and clothes expensive.'
'But if you want to  beat  the Old Took,' said Pippin, 'I don't see why
we shouldn't try and beat the Bullroarer.'
Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with
pearl mouth-pieces and bound with fine-wrought silver. 'Think of me when you
smoke them!' he said. 'The  Elves made them for  me, but I don't smoke now.'
And then suddenly he nodded and went to sleep for a little; and when he woke
up again he said: 'Now where were we? Yes, of course, giving presents. Which
reminds me: what's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?'
'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,' said Frodo. 'I got rid of it, you know.'
'What a  pity!' said  Bilbo. 'I should have liked to see  it again. But
