'Well, Mr. Frodo, we've been far and seen a deal, and yet I don't think
we've found a better place than this. There's  something of everything here,
if  you understand me:  the Shire and the Golden Wood and  Gondor and kings'
houses and  inns and  meadows and mountains all mixed.  And  yet, somehow,
I
feel we ought to be going soon. I'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the
truth.'
'Yes,  something  of  everything,  Sam,  except  the  Sea,'  Frodo  had
answered; and he repeated it now to himself: 'Except the Sea.'
That  day  Frodo spoke to Elrond, and  it was  agreed  that they should
leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: 'I think I shall come
too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.'
In  the evening  they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. 'Well, if you must
go, you must,' he said.  'I am sorry.  I shall miss you.  It is nice just to
know that  you are about the  place. But I am getting very sleepy.' Then  he
gave Frodo his mithril-coat  and Sting, forgetting that he had  already done
so;  and  he gave him  also three books of lore that he had made  at various
times,  written  in  his spidery hand,  and labelled  on  their  red  backs:
Translations from the Elvish, by B.B.
To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. 'Almost the last drop of the Smaug
vintage,' he  said.  'May come in  useful,  if you think of getting married,
Sam.' Sam blushed.
'I have nothing  much to give to you young fellows,' he said  to  Merry
and Pippin, 'except  good advice.'  And when he had given them a fair sample
of  this, he added a last item in Shire-fashion:  'Don't let your heads  get
too big for  your hats! But  if you don't  finish growing  up soon,  you are
going to find hats and clothes expensive.'
'But if you want to  beat  the Old Took,' said Pippin, 'I don't see why
we shouldn't try and beat the Bullroarer.'
Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with
pearl mouth-pieces and bound with fine-wrought silver. 'Think of me when you
smoke them!' he said. 'The  Elves made them for  me, but I don't smoke now.'
And then suddenly he nodded and went to sleep for a little; and when he woke
up again he said: 'Now where were we? Yes, of course, giving presents. Which
reminds me: what's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?'
'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,' said Frodo. 'I got rid of it, you know.'
'What a  pity!' said  Bilbo. 'I should have liked to see  it again. But
no, how silly  of me! That's what you went for, wasn't it: to get rid of it?
But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of  other things seem to have got
mixed  up  with it: Aragorn's affairs, and the White Council and Gondor, and
the Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts - did you really see one, Sam? -
and caves and towers and golden trees, and goodness knows what besides.
'I  evidently came  back  by much too straight a  road from my trip.  I
think Gandalf might have shown  me round  a bit. But then the  auction would
have been  over  before I got back,  and I should have had even more trouble
than I  did. Anyway  it's  too  late  now; and really I think it's much more
comfortable to sit  here and hear about it all.  The fire's  very cosy here,
and the food's very good, and there are Elves when you want  them. What more
could one want?
The Road goes ever on and on
Out from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
Let others follow it who can!
Let them a journey new begin,
But I at last with weary feet
Will turn towards the lighted inn,
My evening-rest and sleep to meet.'
And  as Bilbo murmured the last words his head dropped on his chest and
he slept soundly.
The evening deepened in the room,  and the  firelight  burned brighter;
and they looked at Bilbo  as he slept and saw that his face was smiling. For
some time they sat in silence; and then Sam  looking round  at  the room and
the shadows flickering on the walls, said softly:
'I don't think, Mr. Frodo, that he's done much writing while we've been
away. He won't ever write our story now.'
At that  Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he roused
himself. 'You see, I am getting so  sleepy,' he said. 'And when I have  time
to write, I only really like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo my dear fellow,
if you  would very much mind  tidying things up a bit before you go? Collect
all my notes and  papers, and my diary too, and  take them with you, if  you
will. You see, I haven't much time for the selection and the arrangement and
all that.  Get Sam to help, and when you've knocked things into  shape, come
back, and I'll run over it. I won't be too critical.'
'Of course I'll do it!' said Frodo. 'And of course I'll come back soon:
it won't be dangerous any  more. There  is a real king now and he  will soon
put the roads in order.'
'Thank  you, my dear fellow!' said Bilbo. 'That really is a  very great
relief to my mind.' And with that he fell fast asleep again.
The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave  of Bilbo  in his room,
for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to Elrond  and all
his household.
As Frodo stood upon  the threshold, Elrond  wished him  a fair journey,
and blessed him, and he said:
'I think,  Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless you
come  very soon. For  about this time of the year, when the  leaves are gold
before they fall, look for Bilbo in  the woods of the Shire. I shall be with
him.'
These words no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.
