The others looked in the  direction  that  Merry  pointed out, but they
could see little but mists over the damp and  deep-cut valley; and beyond it
the southern half of the Forest faded from view.
The sun on the hill-lop was now  getting  hot. It must  have been about
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in
other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the
Hedge  or  the  valley of  the Brandywine  beyond  it. Northward, where they
looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of  the
great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea
of trees, and the horizon was veiled.
On the south-eastern  side  the ground fell very  steeply,  as  if  the
slopes  of  the  hill   were  continued  far  down  under  the  trees,  like
island-shores that really  are the  sides  of a mountain rising  out of deep
waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them,
while they ate their  mid-day meal. As  the sun rose  and  passed  noon they
glimpsed far  off  in  the east the grey-green lines  of the Downs  that lay
beyond  the Old Forest on that side. That cheered them greatly; for  it  was
good to see a sight of anything beyond the  wood's borders,  though they did
not mean to go  that way,  if  they  could help it: the Barrow-downs  had as
sinister a reputation in hobbit-legend as the Forest itself.
At length they made up their minds  to go on again. The path  that  had
brought them to the hill reappeared on  the northward side; but they had not
followed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to the
right.  Soon it  began  to descend  rapidly and they  guessed  that  it must
actually be heading towards the Withywindle valley: not at all the direction
they  wished  lo  take. After some  discussion  they decided to  leave  this
misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to
see it  from the hill-top, the Road  must lie that way, and it  could not be
many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed
lo  be drier  and more  open,  climbing up to slopes  where  the  trees were
thinner,  and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes  and other  strange
and nameless trees of the denser wood.
At first  their  choice  seemed  to  be good: they got along  at a fair
speed, though whenever they got  a glimpse of the sun  in an open glade they
seemed  unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But  after a time the  trees
began to close in again,  just where they had appeared from a distance to be
thinner and  less tangled. Then  deep  folds  in  the ground were discovered
unexpectedly, like the ruts of great  giant-wheels or  wide moats and sunken
roads long disused and choked with  brambles. These lay usually right across
their  line  of march, and could only be crossed  by scrambling down and out
again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they
climbed down they found the  hollow  filled  with  thick bushes  and  matted
undergrowth, which somehow would not  yield to the  left, but only  gave way
when they turned to the right; and they  had to go some  distance along  the
bottom before they could find a  way up  the  further bank.  Each  time they
clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and  darker;  and always  to the left
and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the
right and downwards.
After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They
were being headed off,  and were simply following a course chosen for them -
eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it.
The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled  into a
fold that was  wider and  deeper than any they had yet met. It  was so sleep
and  overhung that  it proved  impossible  to climb out  of it again, either
forwards  or  backwards, without  leaving  their ponies  and  their  baggage
behind. All  they could do  was to  follow  the fold - downwards. The ground
grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy
bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and
noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully
over-arched by trees high above them.
After stumbling along for some way along  the  stream, they came  quite
suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before
them.  Coming  to the opening they found  that they had  made their way down
through a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide
space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank
almost as  steep. A golden  afternoon  of  late sunshine lay warm and drowsy
upon  the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a  dark
river  of brown  water,  bordered with ancient  willows,  arched  over  with
willows, blocked  with fallen willows,  and flecked with thousands  of faded
willow-leaves.  The  air was thick  with  them, fluttering  yellow from  the
branches;  for there  was a  warm  and gentle breeze blowing  softly  in the
valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking.
'Well, now I have at  least some  notion  of where we are!' said Merry.
'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is
the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.'
He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the  long grasses.
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground
between the cliff-foot and the river; in  some places firm turf went down to
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he  said, 'there seems to be something like
a footpath  winding  along on  this side  of the river. If  we turn left and
follow it, we  shall be bound to  come out on the  east side of  the  Forest
eventually.'
'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That  is, if the  track goes on so far, and
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there.  Who made  the track,
do you suppose, and why?  I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting
very suspicious  of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe
all  the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we  should
have to go?'
'No,' said Merry, 'I  haven't. I don't  know in the  least how far down
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to
make
a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.'
There being nothing  else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and  grasses were lush
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy
to  follow, as it  turned  and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed  over other rills, running down
gullies into the Withywindle  out of the higher  forest-lands,  and at these
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.
The  hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies  of all
kinds buzzing round their  ears, and the afternoon sun was burning  on their
backs.  At last they  came suddenly into a thin shade;  great grey  branches
reached across  the  path. Each step forward became more  reluctant than the
last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their  legs,
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes.
Frodo  felt his  chin go down and  his head nod. Just in front  of  him
Pippin fell forward on to his knees.  Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step  without rest. Must have nap. It's cool
under the willows. Less flies!'
