it won't be dangerous any  more. There  is a real king now and he  will soon
put the roads in order.'
'Thank  you, my dear fellow!' said Bilbo. 'That really is a  very great
relief to my mind.' And with that he fell fast asleep again.
The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave  of Bilbo  in his room,
for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to Elrond  and all
his household.
As Frodo stood upon  the threshold, Elrond  wished him  a fair journey,
and blessed him, and he said:
'I think,  Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless you
come  very soon. For  about this time of the year, when the  leaves are gold
before they fall, look for Bilbo in  the woods of the Shire. I shall be with
him.'
These words no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.
Chapter 7. Homeward Bound
At last  the  hobbits had  their  faces  turned towards home. They were
eager now to see the  Shire again; but at first they  rode  only slowly, for
Frodo had been ill at  ease.  When they came to the  Ford of Bruinen, he had
halted, and seemed loth  to ride into the stream; and they  noted that for a
while his eyes appeared not to see them or things about him. All that day he
was silent. It was the sixth of October.
'Are you in  pain,  Frodo?' said Gandalf quietly  as he rode by Frodo's
side.
'Well, yes I am,' said Frodo. 'It is my shoulder. The  wound aches, and
the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.'
'Alas!  there  are  some  wounds  that  cannot be  wholly  cured,' said
Gandalf.
'I  fear it may be so with  mine,'  said Frodo. 'There is no real going
back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I shall
not  be the same.  I am  wounded  with  knife, sting,  and tooth, and a long
burden. Where shall I find rest?'
Gandalf did not answer.
By the end of the next day  the pain and  unease had passed, and  Frodo
was merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the blackness of the day
before. After that the journey went well,  and the days went quickly by; for
they rode  at leisure,  and often they lingered in the fair  woodlands where
the leaves were red  and yellow  in the  autumn  sun. At length they came to
Weathertop; and  it was then drawing  towards  evening and the shadow of the
hill lay  dark  on the road. Then Frodo begged them to  hasten, and he would
not look towards the hill,  but rode through its shadow with  head bowed and
cloak drawn close about him. That night the weather changed, and a wind came
from the  West laden with rain, and it blew loud and  chill,  and the yellow
leaves whirled like birds in the air. When they came to the Chetwood already
the boughs were almost bare, and a great  curtain  of rain  veiled Bree Hill
from their sight.
So it was that near the end of a wild and wet  evening in the last days
of October the  five travellers rode up  the  climbing road and came  to the
South-gate of Bree.  It was locked fast; and the rain  blew in  their faces,
and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying  by, and their hearts sank
a little, for they had expected more welcome.
When they had called many times, at last  the Gate-keeper came out, and
they saw that  he  carried a great cudgel. He looked at them  with  fear and
suspicion; but  when he saw that Gandalf  was there, and that his companions
were hobbits,  in spite of their strange gear, then he brightened and wished
them welcome.
'Come in!' he said,  unlocking  the  gate. 'We  won't stay for news out
here  in the  cold  and the wet, a ruffianly evening. But old Barley will no
doubt give you a welcome at           The Pony    , and there you'll hear all there is  to
hear.'
'And  there  you'll hear  later all  that  we say,  and  more,' laughed
Gandalf. 'How is Harry?'
The Gate-keeper scowled. 'Gone,' he said. 'But you'd best ask Barliman.
Good evening!'
'Good  evening  to  you!' they said, and passed through; and then  they
noticed  that  behind the  hedge at  the road-side a long low  hut had  been
built, and a  number of  men had come out and were staring at  them over the
fence. When they  came  to  Bill Ferny's house they saw that the hedge there
was tattered and unkempt, and the windows were all boarded up.
'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?' said Pippin.
'I'm not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But  I'd like to know what
became  of that poor  pony. He's  been on my mind many a time and the wolves
howling and all.'
At last they  came  to      The Prancing  Pony        ,  and that at  least  looked
outwardly unchanged;  and  there were lights behind the red curtains  in the
lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door, and opened it a
crack and peeped through; and when  he saw  them standing under the  lamp he
gave a cry of surprise.
'Mr. Butterbur! Master!' he shouted. 'They've come back!'
'Oh  have  they? I'll learn them,' came  Butterbur's voice, and out  he
came with a rush, and he  had a club in his hand.  But when he  saw who they
were he stopped short, and the black scowl on his face changed to wonder and
delight.
'Nob,  you woolly-pated  ninny!'  he cried. 'Can't you give old friends
their names? You shouldn't go scaring  me like that, with times as they are.
