and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying  by, and their hearts sank
a little, for they had expected more welcome.
When they had called many times, at last  the Gate-keeper came out, and
they saw that  he  carried a great cudgel. He looked at them  with  fear and
suspicion; but  when he saw that Gandalf  was there, and that his companions
were hobbits,  in spite of their strange gear, then he brightened and wished
them welcome.
'Come in!' he said,  unlocking  the  gate. 'We  won't stay for news out
here  in the  cold  and the wet, a ruffianly evening. But old Barley will no
doubt give you a welcome at           The Pony    , and there you'll hear all there is  to
hear.'
'And  there  you'll hear  later all  that  we say,  and  more,' laughed
Gandalf. 'How is Harry?'
The Gate-keeper scowled. 'Gone,' he said. 'But you'd best ask Barliman.
Good evening!'
'Good  evening  to  you!' they said, and passed through; and then  they
noticed  that  behind the  hedge at  the road-side a long low  hut had  been
built, and a  number of  men had come out and were staring at  them over the
fence. When they  came  to  Bill Ferny's house they saw that the hedge there
was tattered and unkempt, and the windows were all boarded up.
'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?' said Pippin.
'I'm not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But  I'd like to know what
became  of that poor  pony. He's  been on my mind many a time and the wolves
howling and all.'
At last they  came  to      The Prancing  Pony        ,  and that at  least  looked
outwardly unchanged;  and  there were lights behind the red curtains  in the
lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door, and opened it a
crack and peeped through; and when  he saw  them standing under the  lamp he
gave a cry of surprise.
'Mr. Butterbur! Master!' he shouted. 'They've come back!'
'Oh  have  they? I'll learn them,' came  Butterbur's voice, and out  he
came with a rush, and he  had a club in his hand.  But when he  saw who they
were he stopped short, and the black scowl on his face changed to wonder and
delight.
'Nob,  you woolly-pated  ninny!'  he cried. 'Can't you give old friends
their names? You shouldn't go scaring  me like that, with times as they are.
Well, well! And where have you come from? I never expected to see any of
you
folk again, and that's a fact: going  off into the Wild with  that  Strider,
and all those Black Men about. But I'm right glad to  see you, and none more
than Gandalf. Come in! Come  in!  The same rooms as  - before? They're free.
Indeed  most rooms  are empty  these  days, as I'll  not  hide from you, for
you'll find it out soon enough. And I'll see what can be done  about supper,
as soon as may be; but I'm short-handed at  present. Hey, Nob you slowcoach!
Tell Bob! Ah, but there I'm forgetting, Bob's gone: goes home to his folk at
nightfall now. Well, take the guests' ponies to the stables, Nob! And you'll
be  taking your horse to his  stable yourself Gandalf; I don't doubt. A fine
beast, as  I  said  when  I  first  set eyes  on  him.  Well, come in!  Make
yourselves at home!'
Mr. Butterbur had at  any rate not  changed his manner  of talking, and
still  seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there was hardly
anybody about, and all  was  quiet; from the  Common  Room  there came a
low
murmur of no more than two or three voices. And seen  closer in the light of
two  candles that he lit and carried before them the landlord's face  looked
rather wrinkled and careworn.
He led them down the passage to the parlour that they  had used on that
strange  night more  than  a  year  ago;  and  they  followed him,  a little
disquieted,  for it seemed  plain  to them  that old Barliman was putting  a
brave  face on some trouble.  Things were not what they  had been.  But they
said nothing, and waited.
As  they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper to see
if  all had been to their liking. As indeed  it had: no change for the worse
had  yet come upon the beer  or the victuals at             The Pony     at any rate. 'Now I
won't  make  so  bold as  to  suggest you should  come  to the  Common  Room
tonight,' said Butterbur. 'You'll be tired; and there isn't many folk  there
this evening, anyway. But if you could spare me half an  hour before you  go
to  your beds, I would dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by
ourselves.'
'That  is  just what we should like,  too,'  said Gandalf. 'We  are not
tired.  We have been taking things easy.  We were wet, cold and hungry,  but
all  that you  have  cured.  Come, sit down!  And if you have any pipe-weed,
we'll bless you.'
'Well, if you'd called  for anything else, I'd have been happier,' said
Butterbur. 'That's just a thing that we're  short of, seeing how  we've only
got  what we  grow ourselves, and  that's not enough. There's none to be had
from the Shire these days. But I'll do what I can.'
When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a day or two,
a wad of uncut leaf.  'Southlinch,' he said, 'and the best  we have; but not
the match of Southfarthing,  as I've always said though I'm all  for Bree in
most matters, begging your pardon.'
They put him  in a large chair by the wood-fire, and Gandalf sat on the
other side of the hearth, and the  hobbits  in low chairs between them;  and
then they talked for many times half an hour, and exchanged all such news as
Mr.  Butterbur wished to hear or give. Most of the  things which they had to
tell were a mere  wonder and bewilderment to  their host, and far beyond his
vision; and  they  brought forth few  comments other than: 'You  don't  say;
often repeated in defiance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur's own ears. 'You
don't say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I'm getting so mixed up. You
don't  say,  Master  Gandalf! Well I never!  Who'd  have  thought it in  our
times!'
But he did say much on  his  own account. Things were far from well, he
would say. Business was  not even fair, it was downright bad.  'No one comes
nigh Bree  now from Outside,'  he said. 'And the inside  folks, they stay at
home mostly and keep their doors barred. It all comes of those newcomers and
gangrels that began coming up the Greenway  last year,  as you may remember;
but  more came later. Some were just poor bodies running away from  trouble;
but most were bad men, full o' thievery and  mischief. And there was trouble
right here  in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there  were
some folk killed, killed dead! If you'll believe me.'
'I will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'How many?'
'Three  and two,' said  Butterbur,  referring to the big  folk  and the
little. 'There was poor  Mat Heathertoes, and  Rowlie Appledore,  and little
Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and  Willie Banks from up-away, and one of
the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed. And Harry
Goatleaf that used to be on the West-gate, and that Bill Ferny, they came in
on the strangers' side, and they've gone off  with them; and it's my  belief
they let them in. On the night of the  fight, I  mean. And that was after we
showed them the gates and  pushed them out: before the year's end, that was;
and the fight was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had.
