'Well, if you'd called  for anything else, I'd have been happier,' said
Butterbur. 'That's just a thing that we're  short of, seeing how  we've only
got  what we  grow ourselves, and  that's not enough. There's none to be had
from the Shire these days. But I'll do what I can.'
When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a day or two,
a wad of uncut leaf.  'Southlinch,' he said, 'and the best  we have; but not
the match of Southfarthing,  as I've always said though I'm all  for Bree in
most matters, begging your pardon.'
They put him  in a large chair by the wood-fire, and Gandalf sat on the
other side of the hearth, and the  hobbits  in low chairs between them;  and
then they talked for many times half an hour, and exchanged all such news as
Mr.  Butterbur wished to hear or give. Most of the  things which they had to
tell were a mere  wonder and bewilderment to  their host, and far beyond his
vision; and  they  brought forth few  comments other than: 'You  don't  say;
often repeated in defiance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur's own ears. 'You
don't say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I'm getting so mixed up. You
don't  say,  Master  Gandalf! Well I never!  Who'd  have  thought it in  our
times!'
But he did say much on  his  own account. Things were far from well, he
would say. Business was  not even fair, it was downright bad.  'No one comes
nigh Bree  now from Outside,'  he said. 'And the inside  folks, they stay at
home mostly and keep their doors barred. It all comes of those newcomers and
gangrels that began coming up the Greenway  last year,  as you may remember;
but  more came later. Some were just poor bodies running away from  trouble;
but most were bad men, full o' thievery and  mischief. And there was trouble
right here  in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there  were
some folk killed, killed dead! If you'll believe me.'
'I will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'How many?'
'Three  and two,' said  Butterbur,  referring to the big  folk  and the
little. 'There was poor  Mat Heathertoes, and  Rowlie Appledore,  and little
Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and  Willie Banks from up-away, and one of
the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed. And Harry
Goatleaf that used to be on the West-gate, and that Bill Ferny, they came in
on the strangers' side, and they've gone off  with them; and it's my  belief
they let them in. On the night of the  fight, I  mean. And that was after we
showed them the gates and  pushed them out: before the year's end, that was;
and the fight was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had.
'And now they're gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the woods
beyond Archet, and out  in the wilds north-away. It's like a  bit of the bad
old  times tales tell of, I say. It  isn't safe  on the road and nobody goes
far, and folk lock up  early. We have to keep watchers all round  the  fence
and put a lot of men on the gates at nights.'
'Well, no one troubled us,' said Pippin, 'and we came along slowly, and
kept no watch. We thought we'd left all trouble behind us.'
'Ah, that you haven't, Master,  more's the pity,'  said Butterbur. 'But
it's  no wonder they left  you alone. They wouldn't go for  armed folk, with
swords and helmets and  shields  and all. Make them think twice, that would.
And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw you.'
Then the hobbits suddenly realized  that people had looked at them with
amazement  not out of surprise at their return so much as in wonder at their
gear.  They  themselves  had  become  so  used to warfare and  to  riding in
well-arrayed  companies  that they had quite  forgotten that the bright mail
peeping from  under their cloaks, and the helms of Gondor and the Mark,  and
the  fair devices  on  their  shields,  would seem  outlandish in  their own
country. And Gandalf, too, was now  riding on his tall grey  horse, all clad
in white with a great mantle of blue and silver over all, and the long sword
Glamdring at his side.
Gandalf  laughed. 'Well,  well,'  he  said, 'if they are afraid of just
five of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But  at any  rate
they will give you peace at night while we stay.'
'How long will that be?' said Butterbur.  'I'll  not deny we  should be
glad to have you about for a bit. You see, we're not used to  such troubles;
and  the  Rangers have all gone  away,  folk tell  me.  I don't  think we've
rightly understood  till  now what  they did for us. For there's  been worse
than robbers about.  Wolves  were howling round  the fences last winter. And
there's  dark shapes in the woods, dreadful  things that it makes the  blood
run cold to think of. It's been very disturbing, if you understand me.'
'I expect it has,' said Gandalf. 'Nearly all  lands have been disturbed
these days, very disturbed. But cheer up,  Barliman!  You  have been  on the
edge  of very great troubles, and I  am only glad to hear that  you have not
been  deeper in.  But  better times are  coming. Maybe,  better than any you
remember. The Rangers have returned. We came back with them.  And there is
a
king again, Barliman. He will soon be turning his mind this way.
'Then the Greenway will  be opened again, and his  messengers will come
north,  and  there will  be comings and  goings, and the evil things will be
driven out of  the waste-lands. Indeed the  waste in  time will be  waste no
longer,  and  there   will  be  people  and  fields  where  once  there  was
wilderness.'
Mr. Butterbur shook his head. 'If there's a few decent respectable folk
on the roads, that  won't do no harm,' he said. 'But  we  don't want no more
rabble and ruffians. And  we don't want no outsiders at Bree, nor  near Bree
at all. We want to be let alone.  I  don't want a  whole  crowd o' strangers
camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.'
'You will be let  alone, Barliman,' said Gandalf. 'There is room enough
for realms between Isen and Greyflood, or along the shore lands south of the
Brandywine, without any one living within many days' ride of  Bree. And many
folk used to dwell away north, a hundred miles or more from here, at the far
end of the Greenway: on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim.'
'Up away by Deadmen's Dike?' said Butterbur, looking even more dubious.
'That's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.'
'The Rangers go  there,' said Gandalf.  'Deadmen's Dike, you say. So it
has  been called for long years;  but its right  name, Barliman, is  Fornost
Erain, Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there again one day; and
then you'll have some fair folk riding through.'
'Well,  that sounds more hopeful, I'll  allow,' said Butterbur. 'And it
will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.'
'He will,' said Gandalf. 'He knows it and loves it.'
'Does he now?' said Butterbur looking puzzled. 'Though I'm sure I don't
know  why  he  should, sitting  in his  big  chair up in his  great  castle,
hundreds  of miles away. And drinking wine out of a  golden cup, I shouldn't
wonder.  What's       The Pony      to him, or mugs  o'  beer? Not  but what my beer's
good, Gandalf. It's been uncommon good, since you came in the autumn of last
year and put a good word on it. And that's been a comfort in trouble, I will
say.'
'Ah!' said Sam. 'But he says your beer is always good.'
'He says?'
'Of course he does. He's Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven't you
got that into your head yet?'
It went in at last, and  Butterbur's face was  a study in  wonder.  The
eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped.
