'Then the Greenway will  be opened again, and his  messengers will come
north,  and  there will  be comings and  goings, and the evil things will be
driven out of  the waste-lands. Indeed the  waste in  time will be  waste no
longer,  and  there   will  be  people  and  fields  where  once  there  was
wilderness.'
Mr. Butterbur shook his head. 'If there's a few decent respectable folk
on the roads, that  won't do no harm,' he said. 'But  we  don't want no more
rabble and ruffians. And  we don't want no outsiders at Bree, nor  near Bree
at all. We want to be let alone.  I  don't want a  whole  crowd o' strangers
camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.'
'You will be let  alone, Barliman,' said Gandalf. 'There is room enough
for realms between Isen and Greyflood, or along the shore lands south of the
Brandywine, without any one living within many days' ride of  Bree. And many
folk used to dwell away north, a hundred miles or more from here, at the far
end of the Greenway: on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim.'
'Up away by Deadmen's Dike?' said Butterbur, looking even more dubious.
'That's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.'
'The Rangers go  there,' said Gandalf.  'Deadmen's Dike, you say. So it
has  been called for long years;  but its right  name, Barliman, is  Fornost
Erain, Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there again one day; and
then you'll have some fair folk riding through.'
'Well,  that sounds more hopeful, I'll  allow,' said Butterbur. 'And it
will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.'
'He will,' said Gandalf. 'He knows it and loves it.'
'Does he now?' said Butterbur looking puzzled. 'Though I'm sure I don't
know  why  he  should, sitting  in his  big  chair up in his  great  castle,
hundreds  of miles away. And drinking wine out of a  golden cup, I shouldn't
wonder.  What's       The Pony      to him, or mugs  o'  beer? Not  but what my beer's
good, Gandalf. It's been uncommon good, since you came in the autumn of last
year and put a good word on it. And that's been a comfort in trouble, I will
say.'
'Ah!' said Sam. 'But he says your beer is always good.'
'He says?'
'Of course he does. He's Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven't you
got that into your head yet?'
It went in at last, and  Butterbur's face was  a study in  wonder.  The
eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped.
'Strider!' he exclaimed when he  got back his breath.  'Him with a crown and
all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming to?'
'Better times, for Bree at any rate,' said Gandalf.
'I hope so, I'm sure,' said Butterbur. 'Well, this  has been the nicest
chat I've  had  in  a month of  Mondays. And  I'll not deny that I'll  sleep
easier  tonight and with a lighter heart. You've given  me a powerful lot to
think over, but  I'll put that off until tomorrow. I'm  for bed, and I've no
doubt  you'll be glad  of your beds too. Hey, Nob!' he called, going to  the
door. 'Nob, you slowcoach!'
'Now!' he said to himself, slapping his  forehead. 'Now what  does that
remind me of?'
'Not  another letter  you've forgotten. I hope,  Mr.  Butterbur?'  said
Merry.
'Now, now, Mr.  Brandybuck, don't go reminding me of  that! But  there,
you've  broken my  thought. Now where was I? Nob,  stables, ah! that was it.
I've something that  belongs to  you.  If you recollect Bill  Ferny  and the
horsethieving: his pony as you bought,  well,  it's  here. Come  back all of
itself, it did. But where it had been to you know better than me. It was  as
shaggy as an old dog and as lean as a clothes-rail, but it  was alive. Nob's
looked after it.'
'What! My Bill?' cried Sam. 'Well, I was born lucky, whatever my gaffer
may say. There's another  wish come true! Where is he?' Sam  would not go to
bed until he had visited Bill in his stable.
The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur could
not complain of his  business next evening at any  rate. Curiosity  overcame
all fears,  and his house was  crowded.  For a while  out of politeness  the
hobbits  visited the Common  Room in the evening  and  answered a  good
many
questions. Bree memories being retentive,  Frodo was  asked many times if he
had written his book.
'Not yet,' he answered. 'I am going home now to put my notes in order.'
He promised to deal  with the amazing events at Bree, and so  give a bit  of
interest to  a book that appeared likely to  treat mostly of  the remote and
less important affairs 'away south'.
Then  one of  the  younger folk called for  a song. But at that a  hush
fell,  and he was frowned  down,  and the  call  was not repeated. Evidently
there was no wish for any uncanny events in the Common Room again.
No trouble by day, nor  any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree
while the travellers remained there; but the next morning they got up early,
for  as the  weather  was still rainy they wished to reach the  Shire before
night, and it was a long ride. The Bree folk were  all out  to see them off,
and were in merrier mood than they had  been  for a year; and  those who had
not seen the  strangers in all  their gear before gaped with wonder at them:
at Gandalf with his white beard,  and  the light that  seemed to  gleam from
him, as if his  blue mantle was only a  cloud over sunshine; and at the four
hobbits like riders upon errantry out of almost  forgotten tales. Even those
who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there might be
some truth in it.
'Well, good luck on your road,  and good luck to your home-coming! said
Mr. Butterbur. 'I  should have warned you before that  all's not well in the
Shire neither, if what we  hear is true.  Funny goings on, they say. But one
thing drives out another, and I was full of my own troubles. But if I may be
so  bold, you've come back  changed from your travels, and you look now like
folk as  can deal with troubles  out of hand. I don't  doubt you'll soon set
all to rights. Good  luck to you! And the  oftener you  come back the better
I'll be pleased.'
They wished  him  farewell  and  rode  away,  and  passed  through  the
West-gate and on  towards  the  Shire. Bill the  pony was with them, and  as
before he  had a  good deal of  baggage, but he trotted along beside Sam and
seemed well content.
'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,' said Frodo.
'I can guess some of it,' said Sam gloomily. 'What I saw in the Mirror:
trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row.  I ought to
have hurried back quicker.'
'And something's wrong  with the Southfarthing evidently,'  said Merry.
'There's a general shortage of pipe-weed.'
'Whatever it  is,' said Pippin, 'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you
can be sure of that.'
'Deep in,  but not at the bottom,' said Gandalf.  'You  have  forgotten
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.'
'Well,  we've  got you  with us,' said Merry,  'so things  will soon be
cleared up.'
'I am with you at  present,' said Gandalf, 'but soon I  shall not be. I
am not coming to the Shire. You must  settle its affairs yourselves; that is
