No trouble by day, nor  any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree
while the travellers remained there; but the next morning they got up early,
for  as the  weather  was still rainy they wished to reach the  Shire before
night, and it was a long ride. The Bree folk were  all out  to see them off,
and were in merrier mood than they had  been  for a year; and  those who had
not seen the  strangers in all  their gear before gaped with wonder at them:
at Gandalf with his white beard,  and  the light that  seemed to  gleam from
him, as if his  blue mantle was only a  cloud over sunshine; and at the four
hobbits like riders upon errantry out of almost  forgotten tales. Even those
who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there might be
some truth in it.
'Well, good luck on your road,  and good luck to your home-coming! said
Mr. Butterbur. 'I  should have warned you before that  all's not well in the
Shire neither, if what we  hear is true.  Funny goings on, they say. But one
thing drives out another, and I was full of my own troubles. But if I may be
so  bold, you've come back  changed from your travels, and you look now like
folk as  can deal with troubles  out of hand. I don't  doubt you'll soon set
all to rights. Good  luck to you! And the  oftener you  come back the better
I'll be pleased.'
They wished  him  farewell  and  rode  away,  and  passed  through  the
West-gate and on  towards  the  Shire. Bill the  pony was with them, and  as
before he  had a  good deal of  baggage, but he trotted along beside Sam and
seemed well content.
'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,' said Frodo.
'I can guess some of it,' said Sam gloomily. 'What I saw in the Mirror:
trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row.  I ought to
have hurried back quicker.'
'And something's wrong  with the Southfarthing evidently,'  said Merry.
'There's a general shortage of pipe-weed.'
'Whatever it  is,' said Pippin, 'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you
can be sure of that.'
'Deep in,  but not at the bottom,' said Gandalf.  'You  have  forgotten
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.'
'Well,  we've  got you  with us,' said Merry,  'so things  will soon be
cleared up.'
'I am with you at  present,' said Gandalf, 'but soon I  shall not be. I
am not coming to the Shire. You must  settle its affairs yourselves; that is
what  you have been trained for. Do you not yet understand? My time is over:
it is no longer my  task to set things to rights, nor to help folk to do so.
And  as for you,  my dear friends, you will need no  help. You are  grown up
now. Grown indeed very high; among the  great you are,  and I have no longer
any fear at all for any of you.
'But if you would know, I am turning aside soon.  I  am going to have a
long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all my time. He is
a moss-gatherer, and I have been a  stone doomed to rolling. But  my rolling
days are ending, and now we shall have much to say to one another.'
In a little while  they came to the point on the East  Road  where they
had taken  leave of  Bombadil; and  they hoped and  half expected to see him
standing there to greet them as they went by. But there was no sign  of him;
and  there was  a grey mist on the Barrow-downs southwards, and  a deep veil
over the Old Forest far away.
They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. 'I should dearly  like to
see the old fellow again,' he said. 'I wonder how he is getting on?'
'As well as ever, you may be sure,' said Gandalf. 'Quite untroubled and
I  should guess, not much interested in anything  that we have done or seen,
unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be a time  later for you
to go and see him. But if I were you, I should press on now for home, or you
will not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked.'
'But there aren't any  gates,' said  Merry, 'not  on the Road; you know
that quite well.  There's  the  Buckland Gate, of course; but they'll let me
through that at any time.'
'There  weren't any gates,  you mean,'  said Gandalf. 'I think you will
find some  now. And  you might have  more trouble even  at the Buckland Gate
than you think. But you'll! manage all right. Good-bye dear friends! Not for
the last time, not yet. Good-bye!'
He turned Shadowfax off the  Road, and the great horse leaped the green
dike that here ran beside  it;  and then at a cry from Gandalf he  was gone,
racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind from the North.
'Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,' said
Merry. 'We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It seems almost
like a dream that has slowly faded.'
'Not to  me,'  said  Frodo. 'To me it  feels  more  like falling asleep
again.'
Chapter 8. The Scouring of the Shire
It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travellers came at last
to  the Brandywine, and  they found  the way  barred. At  either  end of the
Bridge there was a great  spiked gate;  and on the further side of the river
they could see that some new houses had been built: two-storeyed with narrow
straight-sided   windows,  bare   and   dimly  lit,  all  very   gloomy  and
un-Shirelike.
They  hammered on  the outer gate and called, but there was at first no
answer;  and then to their  surprise someone blew a horn, and  the lights in
the windows went out. A voice shouted in the dark:
'Who's that?  Be off! You  can't come in: Can't you read the notice:                  No
admittance between sundown and sunrise                ?'
'Of  course we can't read the notice  in the  dark.' Sam shouted  back.
'And if hobbits of the Shire are to be  kept out in the wet on  a night like
this, I'll tear down your notice when I find it.'
At that a  window slammed, and a crowd  of hobbits with lanterns poured
out of the house on the  left. They opened the  further gate, and some  came
over the bridge. When they saw the travellers they seemed frightened.
'Come along!' said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. 'If you don't
know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should
like
to know what  all this is  about,  and  what a Bucklander  like you is doing
here. You used to be on the Hay Gate.'
'Bless  me!  It's Master Merry, to  be sure,  and all  dressed  up  for
fighting!'  said  old Hob. 'Why,  they  said you was  dead! Lost in  the Old
Forest by all accounts. I'm pleased to see you alive after all!'
'Then  stop gaping  at  me  through the  bars, and open the gate!' said
Merry.
'I'm sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders.'
'Whose orders?'
'The Chief's up at Bag End.'
'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?' said Frodo.
'I suppose  so,  Mr.  Baggins;  but  we have  to say  just  "the Chief"
nowadays.'
