Chapter 8. The Scouring of the Shire
It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travellers came at last
to  the Brandywine, and  they found  the way  barred. At  either  end of the
Bridge there was a great  spiked gate;  and on the further side of the river
they could see that some new houses had been built: two-storeyed with narrow
straight-sided   windows,  bare   and   dimly  lit,  all  very   gloomy  and
un-Shirelike.
They  hammered on  the outer gate and called, but there was at first no
answer;  and then to their  surprise someone blew a horn, and  the lights in
the windows went out. A voice shouted in the dark:
'Who's that?  Be off! You  can't come in: Can't you read the notice:                  No
admittance between sundown and sunrise                ?'
'Of  course we can't read the notice  in the  dark.' Sam shouted  back.
'And if hobbits of the Shire are to be  kept out in the wet on  a night like
this, I'll tear down your notice when I find it.'
At that a  window slammed, and a crowd  of hobbits with lanterns poured
out of the house on the  left. They opened the  further gate, and some  came
over the bridge. When they saw the travellers they seemed frightened.
'Come along!' said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. 'If you don't
know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should
like
to know what  all this is  about,  and  what a Bucklander  like you is doing
here. You used to be on the Hay Gate.'
'Bless  me!  It's Master Merry, to  be sure,  and all  dressed  up  for
fighting!'  said  old Hob. 'Why,  they  said you was  dead! Lost in  the Old
Forest by all accounts. I'm pleased to see you alive after all!'
'Then  stop gaping  at  me  through the  bars, and open the gate!' said
Merry.
'I'm sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders.'
'Whose orders?'
'The Chief's up at Bag End.'
'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?' said Frodo.
'I suppose  so,  Mr.  Baggins;  but  we have  to say  just  "the Chief"
nowadays.'
'Do you indeed!'  said  Frodo. 'Well,  I am  glad he  has  dropped  the
Baggins at any  rate. But  it is evidently high  time that the  family dealt
with him and put him in his place.'
A  hush fell  on the hobbits  beyond the  gate. 'It  won't do  no  good
talking that  way,' said one. 'He'll  get to hear  of it. And if you make so
much noise, you'll wake the Chief's Big Man.'
'We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him,' said Merry. 'If
you mean that your precious Chief has  been hiring ruffians out of the wild,
then we've not come back too  soon.' He sprang from his pony, and seeing the
notice in  the light of the lanterns, he  tore it down and threw it over the
gate. The  hobbits  backed  away and  made no move  to open  it.  'Come  on,
Pippin!' said Merry. 'Two is enough.'
Merry and Pippin  climbed the gate, and the hobbits fled.  Another horn
sounded. Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy figure  appeared
against a light in the doorway.
'What's all this,' he snarled as he  came  forward. 'Gate-breaking? You
clear out, or I'll break your filthy little necks!' Then he  stopped, for he
had caught the gleam of swords.
'Bill Ferny,' said Merry, 'if you don't open that gate in ten  seconds,
you'll regret it. I shall set steel  to you, if you don't obey. And when you
have opened the gates you will go  through  them and never return. You are a
ruffian and a highway-robber.'
Bill  Ferny flinched and shuffled to the gate and unlocked it. 'Give me
the key!' said Merry. But  the ruffian flung it  at his head and then darted
out into the darkness. As he  passed the ponies one of them let fly with his
heels  and just caught him as he ran. He went off with a yelp into the night
and was never heard of again.
'Neat work, Bill,' said Sam, meaning the pony.
'So much for your  Big Man,' said Merry. 'We'll see the Chief later. In
the meantime we want a lodging for the night, and as you seem to have pulled
down the Bridge Inn and built  this dismal place instead, you'll have to put
us up.'
'I am sorry, Mr. Merry,' said Hob, 'but it isn't allowed.'
'What isn't allowed?'
Taking in folk off-hand like and eating extra food, and  all that, said
Hob.
'What's the  matter  with the place?'  said Merry. 'Has it  been a  bad
year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.'
'Well no, the year's been good enough,'  said  Hob. 'We grows a lot  of
food,  but  we  don't  rightly  know what  becomes  of  it.  It's all  these
"gatherers" and "sharers", I reckon, going round counting and measuring  and
taking off to storage. They do more gathering than sharing, and we never see
most of the stuff again.'
'Oh  come!' said  Pippin yawning.  'This  is all too  tiresome  for  me
tonight.  We've  got food in our bags.  Just give  us a room to lie down in.
It'll be better than many places I have seen.'
The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill  at  ease, evidently some rule
or other was being broken;  but there was no gainsaying four such  masterful
travellers, all armed, and two of them uncommonly  large and strong-looking.
Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again. There was some sense at any rate
in  keeping  a  guard,  while  ruffians  were  still about.  Then  the  four
companions   went  into  the  hobbit  guard-house  and  made  themselves  as
comfortable as they  could. It was a bare and ugly place, with a mean little
grate that would not allow a good fire. In the upper  rooms were little rows
of  hard  beds, and on every wall  there was  a notice and a list  of Rules.
Pippin tore them down. There was no beer and very little food, but with what
the travellers brought and shared out they all made a  fair meal; and Pippin
broke Rule 4 by putting most of next day's allowance of wood on the fire.
'Well now,  what  about a  smoke,  while  you tell  us  what  has  been
happening in the Shire?' he said.
'There isn't  no pipe-weed  now,' said  Hob; 'at  least  only  for  the
Chief's  men. All the stocks seem to have gone. We do hear that waggon-loads
of  it went away down the  old road out of the Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford
way. That would  be the end  o' last year, after you left.  But it  had been
going away quietly before that, in a small way. That Lotho--'
'Now you  shut up, Hob Hayward!' cried several of the others. 'You know
talk o' that sort isn't allowed. The Chief will hear of it, and we'll all be
in trouble.'
'He wouldn't hear naught, if some of you here weren't sneaks,' rejoined
Hob hotly.
'All right, all right!' said Sam. "That's quite enough. I don't want to
hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules and orc-talk
instead.  I  hoped  to have a rest, but I can see there's work  and  trouble
ahead. Let's sleep and forget it till morning!'
