year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.'
'Well no, the year's been good enough,'  said  Hob. 'We grows a lot  of
food,  but  we  don't  rightly  know what  becomes  of  it.  It's all  these
"gatherers" and "sharers", I reckon, going round counting and measuring  and
taking off to storage. They do more gathering than sharing, and we never see
most of the stuff again.'
'Oh  come!' said  Pippin yawning.  'This  is all too  tiresome  for  me
tonight.  We've  got food in our bags.  Just give  us a room to lie down in.
It'll be better than many places I have seen.'
The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill  at  ease, evidently some rule
or other was being broken;  but there was no gainsaying four such  masterful
travellers, all armed, and two of them uncommonly  large and strong-looking.
Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again. There was some sense at any rate
in  keeping  a  guard,  while  ruffians  were  still about.  Then  the  four
companions   went  into  the  hobbit  guard-house  and  made  themselves  as
comfortable as they  could. It was a bare and ugly place, with a mean little
grate that would not allow a good fire. In the upper  rooms were little rows
of  hard  beds, and on every wall  there was  a notice and a list  of Rules.
Pippin tore them down. There was no beer and very little food, but with what
the travellers brought and shared out they all made a  fair meal; and Pippin
broke Rule 4 by putting most of next day's allowance of wood on the fire.
'Well now,  what  about a  smoke,  while  you tell  us  what  has  been
happening in the Shire?' he said.
'There isn't  no pipe-weed  now,' said  Hob; 'at  least  only  for  the
Chief's  men. All the stocks seem to have gone. We do hear that waggon-loads
of  it went away down the  old road out of the Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford
way. That would  be the end  o' last year, after you left.  But it  had been
going away quietly before that, in a small way. That Lotho--'
'Now you  shut up, Hob Hayward!' cried several of the others. 'You know
talk o' that sort isn't allowed. The Chief will hear of it, and we'll all be
in trouble.'
'He wouldn't hear naught, if some of you here weren't sneaks,' rejoined
Hob hotly.
'All right, all right!' said Sam. "That's quite enough. I don't want to
hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules and orc-talk
instead.  I  hoped  to have a rest, but I can see there's work  and  trouble
ahead. Let's sleep and forget it till morning!'
The new  'Chief' evidently had  means of getting news. It  was  a  good
forty miles from  the Bridge to Bag End,  but someone made the journey  in a
hurry. So Frodo and his friends soon discovered.
They had not made any definite plans, but  had vaguely thought of going
down to Crickhollow together first, and resting there a bit. But now, seeing
what things  were like, they decided to go straight to Hobbiton. So the next
day they  set out  along  the Road and jogged  along  steadily. The wind had
dropped but the sky was grey. The land looked rather sad and forlorn; but it
was after all the first of  November and the fag-end of Autumn. Still  there
seemed  an unusual  amount of burning  going  on, and  smoke rose  from many
points  round  about.  A great cloud of  it  was  going up  far  away in the
direction of the Woody End.
As evening fell they were  drawing near to  Frogmorton, a village right
on the Road, about  twenty-two  miles  from the Bridge. There  they meant to
stay  the night;    The Floating Log       at  Frogmorton was a good inn. But as they
came to the  east end of the village they met a barrier with  a large  board
saying NO ROAD; and behind it stood a large band of Shirriffs with staves in
their hands  and  feathers in their caps,  looking both important and rather
scared.
'What's all this?' said Frodo, feeling inclined to laugh.
This is  what it is, Mr. Baggins, said  the leader  of the Shirriffs, a
two-feather hobbit: 'You're arrested for  Gate-breaking,  and  Tearing up of
Rules,  and  Assaulting  Gate-keepers,  and  Trespassing,  and  Sleeping  in
Shire-buildings without Leave, and Bribing Guards with Food.'
'And what else?' said Frodo.
'That'll do to go on with,' said the Shirriff-leader.
'I  can add some more, if  you like it,' said Sam. 'Calling your  Chief
Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you  Shirriffs look  a
lot of Tom-fools.'
'There now, Mister, that'll do.  It's the Chief's orders that you're to
come  along quiet. We're going to  take you to Bywater and hand  you over to
the Chief's Men; and when he deals with your case you can have your say. But
if  you don't want  to  stay in the  Lockholes any longer than you  need,  I
should cut the say short, if I was you.'
To  the  discomfiture  of  the Shirriffs  Frodo  and his companions all
roared with laughter.  'Don't  be absurd!' said Frodo.  'I am  going where I
please, and in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag End on business, but
if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.'
'Very  well, Mr. Baggins,' said the  leader, pushing the barrier aside.
'But don't forget I've arrested you.'
'I won't,'  said Frodo. 'Never.  But  I may forgive  you. Now I am  not
going any  further today, so if you'll kindly escort me to              The Floating Log       ,
I'll be obliged.'
'I   can't  do   that,  Mr.  Baggins.  The  inn's   closed.  There's  a
Shirriff-house at the far end of the village. I'll take you there. '
'All right,' said Frodo. 'Go on and we'll follow.'
Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that
he knew. 'Hey, come here  Robin Smallburrow!' he called. 'I want a word with
you.'
With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked  wrathful but did  not
dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam, who
got down off his pony.
'Look here, Cock-robin!' said  Sam. 'You're Hobbiton-bred and ought  to
have more sense,  coming a-waylaying Mr. Frodo and all.  And what's all this
about the inn being closed?'
'They're all closed,' said Robin.  'The  Chief  doesn't hold with beer.
Leastways  that is how it started. But now I reckon it's his Men that has it
all.  And he  doesn't  hold with folk moving about; so if they  will or they
must, then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain their business.'
'You  ought to  be ashamed of  yourself having anything to do with such
nonsense,' said Sam. 'You used to like the inside of an inn better than  the
outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.'
'And so I would be still,  Sam,  if I  could. But don't be  hard on me.
What  can I  do? You know  how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, before
any of this began. Gave me a chance of walking round the  country and seeing
folk, and hearing the news,  and knowing where the  good beer was.  But  now
it's different.'
'But you can give it  up,  stop Shirriffing, if it has  stopped being a
respectable job,' said Sam.
'We're not allowed to,' said Robin.
'If  I hear   not allowed   much oftener,' said  Sam, 'I'm  going  to  get
angry.'
'Can't say as I'd be sorry to see  it,'  said Robin lowering his voice.
'If we  all got angry together something might be done. But  it's these Men,
