if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.'
'Very  well, Mr. Baggins,' said the  leader, pushing the barrier aside.
'But don't forget I've arrested you.'
'I won't,'  said Frodo. 'Never.  But  I may forgive  you. Now I am  not
going any  further today, so if you'll kindly escort me to              The Floating Log       ,
I'll be obliged.'
'I   can't  do   that,  Mr.  Baggins.  The  inn's   closed.  There's  a
Shirriff-house at the far end of the village. I'll take you there. '
'All right,' said Frodo. 'Go on and we'll follow.'
Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that
he knew. 'Hey, come here  Robin Smallburrow!' he called. 'I want a word with
you.'
With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked  wrathful but did  not
dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam, who
got down off his pony.
'Look here, Cock-robin!' said  Sam. 'You're Hobbiton-bred and ought  to
have more sense,  coming a-waylaying Mr. Frodo and all.  And what's all this
about the inn being closed?'
'They're all closed,' said Robin.  'The  Chief  doesn't hold with beer.
Leastways  that is how it started. But now I reckon it's his Men that has it
all.  And he  doesn't  hold with folk moving about; so if they  will or they
must, then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain their business.'
'You  ought to  be ashamed of  yourself having anything to do with such
nonsense,' said Sam. 'You used to like the inside of an inn better than  the
outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.'
'And so I would be still,  Sam,  if I  could. But don't be  hard on me.
What  can I  do? You know  how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, before
any of this began. Gave me a chance of walking round the  country and seeing
folk, and hearing the news,  and knowing where the  good beer was.  But  now
it's different.'
'But you can give it  up,  stop Shirriffing, if it has  stopped being a
respectable job,' said Sam.
'We're not allowed to,' said Robin.
'If  I hear   not allowed   much oftener,' said  Sam, 'I'm  going  to  get
angry.'
'Can't say as I'd be sorry to see  it,'  said Robin lowering his voice.
'If we  all got angry together something might be done. But  it's these Men,
Sam, the Chief's Men. He sends them round everywhere, and if any of us small
folk stand  up for our rights, they drag him off to the Lockholes. They took
old Flourdumpling, old Will Whitfoot the Mayor,  first,  and they've taken a
lot more. Lately it's been getting worse. Often they beat 'em now.'
'Then  why do you do their work far them?' said Sam  angrily. 'Who sent
you to Frogmorton?'
'No one did. We stay  here in the big  Shirriff-house. We're the  First
Eastfarthing Troop now. There's hundreds of Shirriffs all told and they want
more, with  all these new rules. Most of them  are in it against their will,
but not all. Even in  the Shire there are some as like  minding other folk's
business and talking big. And there's worse than  that: there's a  few as do
spy-work for the Chief and his Men.'
'Ah! So that's how you had news of us, is it?'
'That's right. We  aren't allowed to send by it  now, but they use  the
old Quick Post service,  and keep  special runners at  different points. One
came in  from  Whitfurrows  last  night with a "secret message", and another
took it on from  here. And a message came back this afternoon saying you was
to be  arrested and taken to Bywater, not direct to the Lockholes. The Chief
wants to see you at once, evidently.'
'He won't be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with him,' said Sam.
The Shirriff-house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge-house. It had
only one storey,  but it  had the  same narrow windows, and it was built  of
ugly pale bricks,  badly laid. Inside  it was damp and cheerless, and supper
was served on a long  bare table that  had not been scrubbed  for weeks. The
food  deserved no better  setting. The travellers  were  glad  to  leave the
place.  It was about eighteen  miles to  Bywater,  and they  set off at  ten
o'clock  in the morning. They  would have started earlier, only the delay so
plainly annoyed the Shirriff-leader. The west wind had shifted northward and
it was turning colder, but the rain was gone.
It was rather  a comic  cavalcade that left the village, though the few
folk that came out to  stare at the  'get-up' of the travellers did not seem
quite sure whether laughing was allowed. A dozen Shirriffs had been told off
as escort to the  'prisoners'; but Merry made  them  march  in front,  while
Frodo and his friends rode behind. Merry, Pippin, and  Sam sat at their ease
laughing and talking  and singing, while the Shirriffs stumped along  trying
to  look stern and important. Frodo, however, was  silent  and looked rather
sad and thoughtful.
The last person  they passed was a sturdy  old gaffer clipping a hedge.
'Hullo, hullo!' he jeered. 'Now who's arrested who?'
Two of the Shirriffs immediately  left the  party and went towards him.
'Leader!' said  Merry. 'Order your  fellows back to their places at once, if
you don't want me to deal with them!'
The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily. 'Now
get on!' said Merry,  and after that  the  travellers  saw  to it that their
ponies'  pace was quick enough to  push  the Shirriffs along as fast as they
could go. The sun came out,  and in spite of the  chilly wind they were soon
puffing and sweating.
At  the Three-Farthing  Stone they  gave  it  up.  They had done nearly
fourteen  miles with only one rest  at noon. It was now three  o'clock. They
were hungry and very footsore and they could not stand the pace.
'Well, come along in your own time!' said Merry. 'We are going on.'
'Good-bye, Cock-robin!' said Sam. 'I'll wait for you outside                The Green
Dragon    , if you haven't forgotten where that is. Don't dawdle on the way!'
'You're  breaking  arrest,  that's what you're doing,'  said the leader
ruefully, 'and I can't be answerable.'
'We shall  break  a  good many things  yet, and not ask you to answer '
said Pippin. 'Good luck to you!'
The  travellers trotted on, and as the  sun began to  sink towards  the
White Downs far away on the western horizon they came to Bywater by its
wide
pool; and there  they had their first really  painful shock. This  was Frodo
and Sam's own country, and they found out  now that they cared about it more
than any other place in  the world. Many  of  the houses that they had known
were missing. Some seemed to  have been burned down. The pleasant row of
old
hobbit-holes in the  bank on the north  side  of the Pool were deserted, and
their little  gardens that used to run down bright to the water's  edge were
rank with weeds. Worse,  there was a whole line  of the ugly new houses  all
along Pool Side, where the Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank. An avenue of
trees had stood there. They were all  gone.  And  looking with dismay up the
road towards Bag  End they saw  a  tall chimney of brick in the distance. It
was pouring out black smoke into the evening air.
Sam was beside himself. 'I'm going right on, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I'm
going to see what's up. I want to find my gaffer.'
