The last person  they passed was a sturdy  old gaffer clipping a hedge.
'Hullo, hullo!' he jeered. 'Now who's arrested who?'
Two of the Shirriffs immediately  left the  party and went towards him.
'Leader!' said  Merry. 'Order your  fellows back to their places at once, if
you don't want me to deal with them!'
The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily. 'Now
get on!' said Merry,  and after that  the  travellers  saw  to it that their
ponies'  pace was quick enough to  push  the Shirriffs along as fast as they
could go. The sun came out,  and in spite of the  chilly wind they were soon
puffing and sweating.
At  the Three-Farthing  Stone they  gave  it  up.  They had done nearly
fourteen  miles with only one rest  at noon. It was now three  o'clock. They
were hungry and very footsore and they could not stand the pace.
'Well, come along in your own time!' said Merry. 'We are going on.'
'Good-bye, Cock-robin!' said Sam. 'I'll wait for you outside                The Green
Dragon    , if you haven't forgotten where that is. Don't dawdle on the way!'
'You're  breaking  arrest,  that's what you're doing,'  said the leader
ruefully, 'and I can't be answerable.'
'We shall  break  a  good many things  yet, and not ask you to answer '
said Pippin. 'Good luck to you!'
The  travellers trotted on, and as the  sun began to  sink towards  the
White Downs far away on the western horizon they came to Bywater by its
wide
pool; and there  they had their first really  painful shock. This  was Frodo
and Sam's own country, and they found out  now that they cared about it more
than any other place in  the world. Many  of  the houses that they had known
were missing. Some seemed to  have been burned down. The pleasant row of
old
hobbit-holes in the  bank on the north  side  of the Pool were deserted, and
their little  gardens that used to run down bright to the water's  edge were
rank with weeds. Worse,  there was a whole line  of the ugly new houses  all
along Pool Side, where the Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank. An avenue of
trees had stood there. They were all  gone.  And  looking with dismay up the
road towards Bag  End they saw  a  tall chimney of brick in the distance. It
was pouring out black smoke into the evening air.
Sam was beside himself. 'I'm going right on, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I'm
going to see what's up. I want to find my gaffer.'
'We  ought  to find  out first what we're in for, Sam,'  said Merry. 'I
guess  that  the "Chief" will have a gang of ruffians handy.  We  had better
find someone who will tell us how things are round here.'
But in the village of Bywater all  the houses and holes  were shut, and
no  one greeted them. They wondered  at  this, but they soon  discovered the
reason  of  it. When they  reached           The Green Dragon        , the last house  on the
Hobbiton side, now lifeless and with broken  windows, they were disturbed to
see half a dozen  large ill-favoured Men lounging against the inn-wall; they
were squint-eyed and sallow-faced.
'Like that friend of Bill Ferny's at Bree,' said Sam.
'Like many that I saw at Isengard,' muttered Merry.
The ruffians had clubs in their  hands  and  horns by their  belts, but
they had no other weapons, as far as could be seen.  As the  travellers rode
up they left the wall and walked into the road, blocking the way.
'Where d'you  think  you're  going?'  said  one,  the largest and  most
evil-looking of the crew.  'There's no road for you any  further.  And where
are those precious Shirriffs?'
'Coming along nicely,'  said  Merry.  'A  little  footsore, perhaps. We
promised to wait for them here.'
'Garn, what did I  say?' said the ruffian to his mates. 'I told Sharkey
it was no  good trusting those little fools. Some of our chaps ought to have
been sent.'
'And  what difference would that have made,  pray?' said Merry. 'We are
not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with them.'
'Footpads, eh?'  said the man: 'So that's your tone, is  it? Change it,
or we'll change  it for you.  You little folk are getting too  uppish. Don't
you trust too much in the Boss's kind heart. Sharkey's come now and he'll do
what Sharkey says.'
'And what may that be?' said Frodo quietly.
'This country wants waking up and setting to rights,' said the ruffian,
'and Sharkey's going to do it; and make it hard, if you drive him to it. You
need a  bigger Boss. And you'll get one  before the year is  out, if there's
any more trouble. Then you'll learn a thing or two, you little rat-folk.'
'Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,' said Frodo. 'I am on  my way
to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too.'
The ruffian laughed. 'Lotho! He knows all right. Don't you worry. He'll
do what  Sharkey says. Because if a  Boss  gives trouble, we can change him.
See? And if little folks try to push in where they're not wanted, we can put
them out of mischief. See?'
'Yes, I see,' said Frodo.  'For one thing, I see that you're behind the
times  and the news here. Much has happened  since you  left the South. Your
day is over, and all other ruffians'. The Dark Tower has  fallen, and  there
is  a  King in  Gondor. And  Isengard has been destroyed,  and your precious
master is  a beggar in  the wilderness. I passed him on the road. The King's
messengers will ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard.'
The  man stared at him  and smiled.  'A  beggar in  the wilderness!' he
mocked.  'Oh, is he  indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock-a-whoop.
But that won't  stop us  living  in this fat  little country  where you have
lazed long enough. And' - he snapped his fingers in Frodo's face  -  'King's
messengers! That for them! When I see one, I'll take notice, perhaps.'
This was too much for  Pippin. His thoughts  went back to  the Field of
Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the Ring-bearer 'little
cock-a-whoop'. He cast back his cloak, flashed out his sword, and the silver
and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he rode forward.
'I  am a  messenger of  the  King,' he  said. 'You are speaking  to the
King's friend,  and one  of the most renowned in all the lands  of the West.
You are a ruffian and a fool. Down on your knees in the road and ask pardon,
or I will set this troll's bane in you!'
The sword glinted in the westering sun. Merry and Sam drew their swords
also and rode  up to support  Pippin;  but Frodo did  not move. The ruffians
gave back. Scaring  Breeland peasants, and  bullying bewildered hobbits, had
been their work. Fearless  hobbits with  bright swords and grim faces were a
great surprise.  And there  was a note in the voices of these newcomers that
they had not heard before. It chilled them with fear.
'Go!'  said Merry. 'If you trouble this  village again, you will regret
it.'  The three  hobbits  came  on, and then  the ruffians  turned and  fled
running away up the Hobbiton Road; but they blew their horns as they ran.
'Well, we've come back none too soon,' said Merry.
'Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,' said
Frodo. 'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.'
'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?' said Pippin. 'Destroy  him I should
say.'
'I don't think you quite understand things, Pippin,' said Frodo. 'Lotho
never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked fool, but he's
