See? And if little folks try to push in where they're not wanted, we can put
them out of mischief. See?'
'Yes, I see,' said Frodo.  'For one thing, I see that you're behind the
times  and the news here. Much has happened  since you  left the South. Your
day is over, and all other ruffians'. The Dark Tower has  fallen, and  there
is  a  King in  Gondor. And  Isengard has been destroyed,  and your precious
master is  a beggar in  the wilderness. I passed him on the road. The King's
messengers will ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard.'
The  man stared at him  and smiled.  'A  beggar in  the wilderness!' he
mocked.  'Oh, is he  indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock-a-whoop.
But that won't  stop us  living  in this fat  little country  where you have
lazed long enough. And' - he snapped his fingers in Frodo's face  -  'King's
messengers! That for them! When I see one, I'll take notice, perhaps.'
This was too much for  Pippin. His thoughts  went back to  the Field of
Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the Ring-bearer 'little
cock-a-whoop'. He cast back his cloak, flashed out his sword, and the silver
and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he rode forward.
'I  am a  messenger of  the  King,' he  said. 'You are speaking  to the
King's friend,  and one  of the most renowned in all the lands  of the West.
You are a ruffian and a fool. Down on your knees in the road and ask pardon,
or I will set this troll's bane in you!'
The sword glinted in the westering sun. Merry and Sam drew their swords
also and rode  up to support  Pippin;  but Frodo did  not move. The ruffians
gave back. Scaring  Breeland peasants, and  bullying bewildered hobbits, had
been their work. Fearless  hobbits with  bright swords and grim faces were a
great surprise.  And there  was a note in the voices of these newcomers that
they had not heard before. It chilled them with fear.
'Go!'  said Merry. 'If you trouble this  village again, you will regret
it.'  The three  hobbits  came  on, and then  the ruffians  turned and  fled
running away up the Hobbiton Road; but they blew their horns as they ran.
'Well, we've come back none too soon,' said Merry.
'Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,' said
Frodo. 'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.'
'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?' said Pippin. 'Destroy  him I should
say.'
'I don't think you quite understand things, Pippin,' said Frodo. 'Lotho
never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked fool, but he's
caught now. The  ruffians are on top, gathering, robbing  and bullying,  and
running or ruining things  as they  like, in his name.  And not  in his name
even for much longer. He's a  prisoner in Bag  End  now,  I expect, and very
frightened. We ought to try and rescue him.'
'Well I  am staggered!' said  Pippin.  'Of all the ends to  our journey
that is the very last I should  have thought  of: to have to fight half-orcs
and ruffians in the Shire itself - to rescue Lotho Pimple!'
'Fight?'  said  Frodo.  'Well,  I  suppose it  may  come  to  that. But
remember: there is to be  no  slaying of hobbits, not even if they have gone
over to the other side. Really gone over, I mean; not just obeying ruffians'
orders  because they  are  frightened.  No hobbit has ever killed another on
purpose in the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And nobody is to be killed
at all,  if it  can be helped. Keep your tempers and hold your hands  to the
last possible moment!'
'But  if  there  are many of  these  ruffians,'  said  Merry,  'it will
certainly mean fighting. You won't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being
shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.'
'No,'  said Pippin. 'It  won't be  so easy scaring them  a second time.
They were taken by  surprise. You heard  that horn-blowing? Evidently  there
are other ruffians near at hand. They'll be much bolder when there's more of
them together. We ought  to think of taking cover somewhere for  the  night.
After all we're only four, even if we are armed.'
'I've an idea,' said  Sam.  'Let's go  to old  Tom Cotton's down  South
Lane! He  always was a  stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that were all
friends of mine.'
'No!'  said Merry.  'It's  no good "getting under cover".  That is just
what people have been  doing, and just what these  ruffians like.  They will
simply come  down on us in force, corner us, and  then drive us out, or burn
us in. No, we have got to do something at once.'
'Do what?' said Pippin.
'Raise the Shire!' said Merry. 'Now! Wake all our people! They hate all
this, you can  see: all of them except perhaps one or two rascals, and a few
fools that want to be important, but  don't at all understand what is really
going  on. But Shire-folk have  been  so comfortable so long they don't know
what to  do. They just want  a match, though, and they'll go up in fire. The
Chief's Men must know that. They'll try to stamp on us and put us out quick.
We've only got a very short time.
'Sam, you can make  a  dash for  Cotton's  farm, if  you like. He's the
chief person round here,  and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to blow the
horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.'
They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned aside and
galloped off down the  lane that led south to Cotton's.  He had not gone far
when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go up ringing  into the sky. Far over
hill and field it echoed; and  so compelling  was that call that Sam himself
almost turned and dashed back. His pony reared and neighed.
'On, lad! On!' he cried. 'We'll be going back soon.'
Then  he heard  Merry  change the  note, and  up went the  Horn-cry  of
Buckland, shaking the air.
Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake!
Fire, Foes! Awake!
Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of
doors. In front of him lights sprang out in  the gloaming; dogs barked; feet
came running. Before he got  to the lane's end there was Farmer Cotton  with
three  of his lads, Young Tom,  Jolly, and Nick,  hurrying towards him. They
had axes in their hands, and barred the way.
'Nay! It's not one of them ruffians,' Sam heard the farmer say. 'It's a
hobbit by the size of it, but all dressed up queer. Hey!' he cried. 'Who are
you, and what's all this to-do?'
'It's Sam, Sam Gamgee. I've come back.'
Farmer Cotton came up close  and stared at him in the twilight. 'Well!'
he exclaimed. 'The voice is right, and your face is  no worse  than  it was,
Sam. But  I should a' passed you in the street in that gear. You've been  in
foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.'
'That I ain't!'  said Sam.  'Nor Mr. Frodo. He's here and  his friends.
And  that's  the to-do. They're raising the Shire. We're going to clear  out
these ruffians, and their Chief too. We're starting now.'
'Good, good!' cried Farmer Cotton.  'So  it's  begun at last! I've been
itching for trouble all this year, but folks wouldn't help. And I've had the
wife  and Rosie to think of. These ruffians don't stick at nothing. But come
on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!'
'What about Mrs.  Cotton and Rosie?' said Sam. 'It  isn't safe  yet for
them to be left all alone.'
'My Nibs  is  with them. But you  can  go and help him,  if you  have a
mind,' said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then  he and his sons ran off towards
