'Well, now I have at  least some  notion  of where we are!' said Merry.
'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is
the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.'
He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the  long grasses.
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground
between the cliff-foot and the river; in  some places firm turf went down to
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he  said, 'there seems to be something like
a footpath  winding  along on  this side  of the river. If  we turn left and
follow it, we  shall be bound to  come out on the  east side of  the  Forest
eventually.'
'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That  is, if the  track goes on so far, and
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there.  Who made  the track,
do you suppose, and why?  I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting
very suspicious  of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe
all  the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we  should
have to go?'
'No,' said Merry, 'I  haven't. I don't  know in the  least how far down
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to
make
a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.'
There being nothing  else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and  grasses were lush
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy
to  follow, as it  turned  and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed  over other rills, running down
gullies into the Withywindle  out of the higher  forest-lands,  and at these
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.
The  hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies  of all
kinds buzzing round their  ears, and the afternoon sun was burning  on their
backs.  At last they  came suddenly into a thin shade;  great grey  branches
reached across  the  path. Each step forward became more  reluctant than the
last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their  legs,
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes.
Frodo  felt his  chin go down and  his head nod. Just in front  of  him
Pippin fell forward on to his knees.  Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step  without rest. Must have nap. It's cool
under the willows. Less flies!'
Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come  on!' he  cried. 'We  can't
have a  nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were
too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.
Suddenly  Frodo  himself  felt  sleep overwhelming him.  His head swam.
There now seemed  hardly a sound  in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing.
Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing,  a soft  fluttering as of a song
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes
and  saw leaning over him a  huge willow-tree,  old  and hoary. Enormous  it
looked,  its  sprawling  branches  going  up like  reaching  arms with  many
long-fingered hands,  its knotted and twisted trunk gaping  in wide fissures
that creaked faintly as the boughs  moved. The leaves fluttering against the
bright sky dazzled  him,  and he toppled over, lying where  he fell upon the
grass.
Merry and Pippin dragged themselves  forward  and  lay down  with their
backs to  the willow-trunk.  Behind them  the  great  cracks gaped  wide  to
receive them as the  tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and
yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their
eyes, and  then it seemed  that  they  could almost hear words,  cool words,
saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow.
Frodo  lay for  a while  fighting with  the sleep that was overpowering
him;  then  with  an  effort  he  struggled  to  his feel again. He  felt  a
compelling  desire for cool water. 'Wait for me,  Sam,' he  stammered. 'Must
bathe feet a minute.'
Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward  side of the tree,
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like  gnarled  dragonets
straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feel
in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back
against the tree.
Sam sat down and  scratched his head, and yawned like a  cavern. He was
worried.  The  afternoon  was  getting late,  and  he  thought  this  sudden
sleepiness  uncanny.  'There's more  behind this than sun and warm air,'  he
muttered  to himself.  'I don't like this great big tree. I  don't trust it.
Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!'
He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become
of the ponies. He found that  two had wandered on a good way along the path;
and he had just  caught them and brought them back towards the others,  when
he  heard two noises; one loud, and the other  soft but very  clear. One was
the  splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast.
He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was  in the water close to the  edge,
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the  jacket, and dragged him  from  under
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once
he woke, and coughed and spluttered.
'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree              threw   me in! I
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!'
'You were dreaming  I expect, Mr. Frodo,'  said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit
in such a place, if you feel sleepy.'
'What  about the  others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder  what sort of  dreams
they are having.'
They went round to the other side of the tree, and  then Sam understood
the click that he had heard. Pippin  had vanished. The crack by which he had
laid himself had closed together, so that  not  a chink could be seen. Merry
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside,
but the  rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of  which  gripped
like a pair of pincers.
Frodo and  Sam beat  first upon the  tree-trunk where Pippin had  lain.
They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held
poor Merry. It was quite useless.
'What a  foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo  wildly. 'Why  did  we ever
come into this dreadful  Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow!' He
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless  of  his own  feet. A hardly
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter.
'I suppose we haven't  got an  axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked
Sam.
'I  brought a  little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That
wouldn't be much use.'
'Wait a minute!'  cried  Sam, struck by an idea suggested by  firewood.
'We might do something with fire!'
'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin
alive inside.'
