'Sam, you can make  a  dash for  Cotton's  farm, if  you like. He's the
chief person round here,  and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to blow the
horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.'
They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned aside and
galloped off down the  lane that led south to Cotton's.  He had not gone far
when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go up ringing  into the sky. Far over
hill and field it echoed; and  so compelling  was that call that Sam himself
almost turned and dashed back. His pony reared and neighed.
'On, lad! On!' he cried. 'We'll be going back soon.'
Then  he heard  Merry  change the  note, and  up went the  Horn-cry  of
Buckland, shaking the air.
Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake!
Fire, Foes! Awake!
Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of
doors. In front of him lights sprang out in  the gloaming; dogs barked; feet
came running. Before he got  to the lane's end there was Farmer Cotton  with
three  of his lads, Young Tom,  Jolly, and Nick,  hurrying towards him. They
had axes in their hands, and barred the way.
'Nay! It's not one of them ruffians,' Sam heard the farmer say. 'It's a
hobbit by the size of it, but all dressed up queer. Hey!' he cried. 'Who are
you, and what's all this to-do?'
'It's Sam, Sam Gamgee. I've come back.'
Farmer Cotton came up close  and stared at him in the twilight. 'Well!'
he exclaimed. 'The voice is right, and your face is  no worse  than  it was,
Sam. But  I should a' passed you in the street in that gear. You've been  in
foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.'
'That I ain't!'  said Sam.  'Nor Mr. Frodo. He's here and  his friends.
And  that's  the to-do. They're raising the Shire. We're going to clear  out
these ruffians, and their Chief too. We're starting now.'
'Good, good!' cried Farmer Cotton.  'So  it's  begun at last! I've been
itching for trouble all this year, but folks wouldn't help. And I've had the
wife  and Rosie to think of. These ruffians don't stick at nothing. But come
on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!'
'What about Mrs.  Cotton and Rosie?' said Sam. 'It  isn't safe  yet for
them to be left all alone.'
'My Nibs  is  with them. But you  can  go and help him,  if you  have a
mind,' said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then  he and his sons ran off towards
the village.
Sam hurried  to  the house. By the  large round  door at the top of the
steps  from the wide yard stood  Mrs. Cotton and Rosie, and Nibs in front of
them grasping a hay-fork.
'It's  me!' shouted Sam  as he trotted up.  'Sam Gamgee! So  don't  try
prodding me, Nibs. Anyway, I've a mail-shirt on me.'
He  jumped down from his pony and went up the steps. They stared at him
in silence. 'Good evening, Mrs. Cotton!' he said. 'Hullo Rosie!'
'Hullo, Sam!' said Rosie. 'Where've you been I They said you were dead;
but I've been expecting you since the Spring. You haven't hurried have you?'
'Perhaps  not,'  said Sam abashed. 'But I'm hurrying now. We're setting
about the ruffians, and I've got to get back to Mr. Frodo. But I thought I'd
have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and you, Rosie.'
'We're keeping nicely, thank you,' said Mrs. Cotton.  'Or should be, if
it weren't for these thieving ruffians.'
'Well, be  off with you!' said Rosie. 'If you've been looking after Mr.
Frodo all this while, what d'you want  to leave  him for, as soon  as things
look dangerous?'
This  was  too much  for Sam. It  needed a  week's answer, or none.  He
turned away and mounted his pony. But as he started off, Rosie  ran down the
steps.
'I think you look fine, Sam,'  she  said. 'Go on now! But  take care of
yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians!'
When  Sam  got back  he found the  whole village roused. Already, apart
from many younger lads,  more  than a hundred sturdy hobbits were  assembled
with axes, and heavy  hammers, and  long knives, and stout staves: and a few
had hunting-bows. More were still coming in from outlying farms.
Some of the village-folk had lit  a large fire, just to enliven things,
and also because it was one of the things forbidden by the Chief. It  burned
bright as  night came on. Others at Merry's orders  were setting up barriers
across the road at each end of the  village. When  the Shirriffs  came up to
the lower  one  they were  dumbfounded; but  as soon as they saw how  things
were, most of  them took off  their  feathers and joined in  the revolt. The
others slunk away.
Sam found Frodo and his friends by the  fire talking to old Tom Cotton,
while an admiring crowd of Bywater folk stood round and stared.
'Well, what's the next move?' said Farmer Cotton.
'I  can't  say,'  said Frodo, 'until  I  know more. How  many  of these
ruffians are there?'
'That's  hard  to tell,' said  Cotton. 'They moves  about and comes and
goes. There's  sometimes  fifty of them  in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but
they go out  from there roving round,  thieving  or "gathering" as they call
it. Still there's seldom  less  than a score  round the  Boss, as they names
him. He's at Bag End, or was; but he don't go outside the rounds now. No one
s seen him at all, in fact, for a week or two; but the Men  don't let no one
go near.'
'Hobbiton's not their only place, is it?' said Pippin.
'No, more's the pity,' said Cotton. 'There's a  good few down south  in
Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Woody
End;
and they've sheds at Waymeet.  And then there's  the Lockholes, as they call
'em:  the old  storage-tunnels  at  Michel Delving  that  they've made  into
prisons  for  those as stand up to  them. Still I  reckon there's  not above
three hundred of  them in the Shire all told, and  maybe less. We can master
them, if we stick together.'
'Have they got any weapons?' asked Merry.
'Whips,  knives, and  clubs, enough for their dirty  work:  that's  all
they've showed so far,' said Cotton. 'But I dare say they've got other gear,
if it comes to fighting. Some have bows, anyway. They've shot one or two  of
our folk.'
'There  you are, Frodo!' said Merry. 'I knew we should have  to  fight.
Well, they started the killing.'
'Not exactly,' said Cotton. 'Leastways not the  shooting. Tooks started
that. You see our dad Mr. Peregrin, he's never had no truck with this Lotho,
not  from the beginning: said that if anyone was going to play the chief  at
this time of day,  it would  be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart.
And when Lotho sent his Men they got no  change out of him. Tooks are lucky,
they've got those deep holes in the Green Hills,  the Great  Smials and all,
and the  ruffians can't come at 'em; and they won't let the ruffians come on
their land.  If they  do, Tooks hunt  'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and
robbing.  After  that the  ruffians turned nastier. And they  keep  a pretty
close watch on Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.'
'Good  for the  Tooks!' cried Pippin.  'But someone is going  to get in
again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough?'
