'I  can't  say,'  said Frodo, 'until  I  know more. How  many  of these
ruffians are there?'
'That's  hard  to tell,' said  Cotton. 'They moves  about and comes and
goes. There's  sometimes  fifty of them  in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but
they go out  from there roving round,  thieving  or "gathering" as they call
it. Still there's seldom  less  than a score  round the  Boss, as they names
him. He's at Bag End, or was; but he don't go outside the rounds now. No one
s seen him at all, in fact, for a week or two; but the Men  don't let no one
go near.'
'Hobbiton's not their only place, is it?' said Pippin.
'No, more's the pity,' said Cotton. 'There's a  good few down south  in
Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Woody
End;
and they've sheds at Waymeet.  And then there's  the Lockholes, as they call
'em:  the old  storage-tunnels  at  Michel Delving  that  they've made  into
prisons  for  those as stand up to  them. Still I  reckon there's  not above
three hundred of  them in the Shire all told, and  maybe less. We can master
them, if we stick together.'
'Have they got any weapons?' asked Merry.
'Whips,  knives, and  clubs, enough for their dirty  work:  that's  all
they've showed so far,' said Cotton. 'But I dare say they've got other gear,
if it comes to fighting. Some have bows, anyway. They've shot one or two  of
our folk.'
'There  you are, Frodo!' said Merry. 'I knew we should have  to  fight.
Well, they started the killing.'
'Not exactly,' said Cotton. 'Leastways not the  shooting. Tooks started
that. You see our dad Mr. Peregrin, he's never had no truck with this Lotho,
not  from the beginning: said that if anyone was going to play the chief  at
this time of day,  it would  be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart.
And when Lotho sent his Men they got no  change out of him. Tooks are lucky,
they've got those deep holes in the Green Hills,  the Great  Smials and all,
and the  ruffians can't come at 'em; and they won't let the ruffians come on
their land.  If they  do, Tooks hunt  'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and
robbing.  After  that the  ruffians turned nastier. And they  keep  a pretty
close watch on Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.'
'Good  for the  Tooks!' cried Pippin.  'But someone is going  to get in
again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough?'
Pippin rode off with half  a dozen lads on ponies.  'See you soon!'  he
cried. 'It's only  fourteen miles or so over the fields. I'll bring you back
an army of Tooks in the morning.' Merry blew  a horn-call after them as they
rode off into the gathering night. The people cheered.
'All the same,' said Frodo to all those who stood near, 'I wish for  no
killing; not even of the ruffians, unless  it must be done, to  prevent them
from hurting hobbits.'
'All right!'  said Merry.  'But  we shall be having  a visit  from  the
Hobbiton gang any time  now, I  think. They  won't come just to  talk things
over.  We'll try to deal with them  neatly, but  we must be prepared for the
worst. Now I've got a plan.'
'Very good,' said Frodo. 'You make the arrangements.'
Just  then  some hobbits, who had  been sent out towards Hobbiton, came
running in. 'They're coming!' they said. 'A score or more. But two have gone
off west across country.'
'To Waymeet, that'll be,' said  Cotton,  'to fetch  more  of  the gang.
Well, it's fifteen mile each way. We needn't trouble about them just yet.'
Merry  hurried off to  give orders. Farmer Cotton cleared  the  street,
sending everyone indoors, except the  older  hobbits who had weapons of some
sort. They had not long to wait. Soon they could hear loud  voices, and then
the  tramping  of heavy feet. Presently  a whole squad of the  ruffians came
down  the  road. They saw the barrier and laughed. They did not imagine that
there  was anything in  this little  land  that would stand up to  twenty of
their kind together.
The hobbits  opened the barrier and stood aside.  'Thank you!' the  Men
jeered. 'Now run home to bed before you're whipped.' Then they marched along
the street  shouting: 'Put those lights out! Get indoors  and stay there! Or
we'll take fifty  of you  to the Lockholes for  a year. Get in!  The Boss is
losing his temper.'
No one paid any heed to their orders; but as the  ruffians passed, they
closed in  quietly behind and followed them.  When the  Men reached the fire
there was Farmer Cotton standing all alone warming his hands.
'Who  are   you,  and  what   d'you   think  you're  doing?'  said  the
ruffian-leader.
Farmer Cotton looked at him slowly. 'I was just going to ask you that,'
he said. 'This isn't your country, and you're not wanted.'
'Well, you're wanted  anyhow,' said the leader. 'We want you.  Take him
lads! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him quiet!'
The Men took one step forward  and stopped short. There rose a  roar of
voices all round them,  and suddenly  they were aware that Farmer Cotton was
not  all  alone. They  were surrounded.  In  the dark  on  the  edge  of the
firelight stood a ring  of hobbits  that had crept  up out  of  the shadows.
There was nearly two hundred of them, all holding some weapon.
Merry stepped  forward. 'We have met before,' he  said  to  the leader,
'and I warned you not to come  back here. I warn you again: you are standing
in  the  light and you are covered  by archers. If you lay a finger on  this
farmer, or on anyone  else, you will be  shot at once.  Lay down any weapons
that you have!'
The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not scared, not now
with a score of his fellows to  back  him.  He knew too little of hobbits to
understand his peril.  Foolishly he  decided to  fight. It  would be easy to
break out.
'At 'em lads!' he cried. 'Let 'em have it!'
With a  long knife in his left hand and a  club in  the other he made a
rush  at the  ring, trying  to burst out back towards Hobbiton.  He aimed  a
savage blow at Merry who stood in his way.  He fell dead with four arrows in
him:
That was enough for the others.  They gave in. Their weapons were taken
from them, and they were roped  together,  and marched  off to  an empty hut
that they had built themselves, and there they were tied hand  and foot, and
locked up under guard. The dead leader was dragged off and buried.
'Seems almost too easy  after all, don't it?' said Cotton.  'I said  we
could master them. But we needed a call. You came  back in the nick o' time,
Mr. Merry.'
'There's more to be done still,' said Merry. 'If  you're  right in your
reckoning, we haven't dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it's  dark now.  I
think the  next stroke must  wait  until morning. Then  we must  call on the
Chief.'
'Why not  now?' said Sam.  'It's not much more than  six o'clock. And I
want to see my gaffer. D'you know what's come of him, Mr. Cotton?'
'He's not too  well,  and not too bad, Sam,' said the farmer. 'They dug
up Bagshot Row, and that  was a sad blow  to  him. He's in one of  them  new
houses that  the Chief's Men  used to  build while  they still did any  work
other than burning and thieving:  not  above a mile from the end of Bywater.
