lads! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him quiet!'
The Men took one step forward  and stopped short. There rose a  roar of
voices all round them,  and suddenly  they were aware that Farmer Cotton was
not  all  alone. They  were surrounded.  In  the dark  on  the  edge  of the
firelight stood a ring  of hobbits  that had crept  up out  of  the shadows.
There was nearly two hundred of them, all holding some weapon.
Merry stepped  forward. 'We have met before,' he  said  to  the leader,
'and I warned you not to come  back here. I warn you again: you are standing
in  the  light and you are covered  by archers. If you lay a finger on  this
farmer, or on anyone  else, you will be  shot at once.  Lay down any weapons
that you have!'
The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not scared, not now
with a score of his fellows to  back  him.  He knew too little of hobbits to
understand his peril.  Foolishly he  decided to  fight. It  would be easy to
break out.
'At 'em lads!' he cried. 'Let 'em have it!'
With a  long knife in his left hand and a  club in  the other he made a
rush  at the  ring, trying  to burst out back towards Hobbiton.  He aimed  a
savage blow at Merry who stood in his way.  He fell dead with four arrows in
him:
That was enough for the others.  They gave in. Their weapons were taken
from them, and they were roped  together,  and marched  off to  an empty hut
that they had built themselves, and there they were tied hand  and foot, and
locked up under guard. The dead leader was dragged off and buried.
'Seems almost too easy  after all, don't it?' said Cotton.  'I said  we
could master them. But we needed a call. You came  back in the nick o' time,
Mr. Merry.'
'There's more to be done still,' said Merry. 'If  you're  right in your
reckoning, we haven't dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it's  dark now.  I
think the  next stroke must  wait  until morning. Then  we must  call on the
Chief.'
'Why not  now?' said Sam.  'It's not much more than  six o'clock. And I
want to see my gaffer. D'you know what's come of him, Mr. Cotton?'
'He's not too  well,  and not too bad, Sam,' said the farmer. 'They dug
up Bagshot Row, and that  was a sad blow  to  him. He's in one of  them  new
houses that  the Chief's Men  used to  build while  they still did any  work
other than burning and thieving:  not  above a mile from the end of Bywater.
But he comes around to me, when he gets a chance,  and I see he's better fed
than some of the poor bodies. All against             The Rules   , of course. I'd have had
him with me, but that wasn't allowed.'
'Thank'ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I'll never forget it,' said Sam. 'But
I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they  spoke of, they might
do a mischief up there before the morning.'
'All right, Sam,' said Cotton.  'Choose a  lad or two, and go and fetch
him to my  house. You'll not have need to  go near the old  Hobbiton village
over Water. My Jolly here will show you.'
Sam went off. Merry arranged for look-outs round the village and guards
at  the barriers during  the  night. Then he and Frodo went off with  Farmer
Cotton. They sat with  the family in the warm kitchen, and the Cottons asked
a  few polite  questions about  their travels,  but hardly  listened  to the
answers: they were far more concerned with events in the Shire.
'It all began with Pimple, as we call him,' said Farmer Cotton; 'and it
began as soon as you'd  gone off, Mr. Frodo.  He'd funny  ideas had  Pimple.
Seems he wanted to own everything himself, and  then order other folk about.
It soon came out that he already did own a sight more than was good for him;
and  he was  always grabbing  more, though  where he got  the  money  was  a
mystery:  mills and malt-houses and  inns,  and farms, and leaf-plantations.
He'd already bought Sandyman's mill before he came to Bag End, seemingly.
'Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which
he had from his dad; and it seems he'd been selling a  lot o' the best leaf,
and sending it away quietly for a year or two.  But at the end o'  last year
he began sending away  loads of  stuff,  not only leaf. Things  began to get
short, and winter coming on, too. Folk got angry, but  he had his answer.  A
lot of Men, ruffians mostly,  came with great waggons, some to carry off the
goods south-away,  and  others  to stay. And  more came.  And before we knew
where we were they were planted here  and there all over the Shire, and were
felling trees  and digging and building themselves sheds and houses just  as
they liked. At first goods and damage was paid  for by Pimple; but soon they
began lording it around and taking what they wanted.
'Then there was a bit  of trouble,  but not  enough. Old Will the Mayor
set off for  Bag End to protest, but he never got there. Ruffians laid hands
on him  and took and locked him up in a hole in Michel Delving, and there he
is  now.  And after that, it  would bc soon after New Year,  there wasn't no
more Mayor, and Pimple called himself Chief Shirriff, or just Chief, and did
as  he liked; and  if anyone  got "uppish" as  they called it, they followed
Will. So things went from bad to worse. There wasn't no smoke left, save for
the Men;  and the  Chief didn't hold with beer, save for his Men, and closed
all the inns;  and everything except Rules got  shorter and  shorter, unless
one could hide a bit  of one's own  when the ruffians  went  round gathering
stuff  up "for fair  distribution": which meant  they got it  and we didn't,
except for the leavings which you could have at the Shirriff-houses,  if you
could  stomach them.  All  very bad.  But since Sharkey came it's been plain
ruination.'
'Who is this Sharkey?'  said Merry. 'I heard  one of the ruffians speak
of him.'
'The biggest  ruffian o' the lot, seemingly,' answered  Cotton. 'It was
about last harvest,  end o'  September maybe,  that  we first heard of  him.
We've never seen him, but he's up at Bag End; and he's the real Chief now, I
guess.  All the ruffians  do what he says; and what he says is mostly  hack,
burn, and ruin; and now it s come to killing. There s no longer even any bad
sense in it. They cut down trees and let 'em lie, they burn houses and build
no more.
'Take Sandyman's mill now. Pimple  knocked it down almost as soon as he
came to Bag End. Then he  brought in a lot o' dirty-looking Men  to  build a
bigger one and fill it full o' wheels and outlandish contraptions. Only that
fool Ted was pleased by  that, and he works  there  cleaning  wheels for the
Men, where his dad was the  Miller and his own master.  Pimple's idea was to
grind  more  and faster, or  so he said. He's got other mills  like  it. But
you've got to have grist before you can grind; and there was no more for the
new mill to do than for the  old. But since Sharkey came they don't grind no
more corn at all. They're always a-hammering and a-letting out a smoke and a
stench, and there isn't no peace even at night  in  Hobbiton.  And they pour
out filth a  purpose; they've  fouled all  the lower Water  and it's getting
down into Brandywine. If they want to make the Shire into a desert,  they're
going the right way about it. I don't believe that fool of a Pimple's behind
all this. It's Sharkey, I say.'
'That's right!' put in Young Tom. 'Why, they even took Pimple's old ma,
that  Lobelia, and he was  fond  of her,  if no one  else was.  Some  of the
Hobbiton folk, they  saw it. She  comes down the lane with her old umbrella.
Some of the ruffians were going up with a big cart.
' "Where be you a-going?" says she.
