as  he liked; and  if anyone  got "uppish" as  they called it, they followed
Will. So things went from bad to worse. There wasn't no smoke left, save for
the Men;  and the  Chief didn't hold with beer, save for his Men, and closed
all the inns;  and everything except Rules got  shorter and  shorter, unless
one could hide a bit  of one's own  when the ruffians  went  round gathering
stuff  up "for fair  distribution": which meant  they got it  and we didn't,
except for the leavings which you could have at the Shirriff-houses,  if you
could  stomach them.  All  very bad.  But since Sharkey came it's been plain
ruination.'
'Who is this Sharkey?'  said Merry. 'I heard  one of the ruffians speak
of him.'
'The biggest  ruffian o' the lot, seemingly,' answered  Cotton. 'It was
about last harvest,  end o'  September maybe,  that  we first heard of  him.
We've never seen him, but he's up at Bag End; and he's the real Chief now, I
guess.  All the ruffians  do what he says; and what he says is mostly  hack,
burn, and ruin; and now it s come to killing. There s no longer even any bad
sense in it. They cut down trees and let 'em lie, they burn houses and build
no more.
'Take Sandyman's mill now. Pimple  knocked it down almost as soon as he
came to Bag End. Then he  brought in a lot o' dirty-looking Men  to  build a
bigger one and fill it full o' wheels and outlandish contraptions. Only that
fool Ted was pleased by  that, and he works  there  cleaning  wheels for the
Men, where his dad was the  Miller and his own master.  Pimple's idea was to
grind  more  and faster, or  so he said. He's got other mills  like  it. But
you've got to have grist before you can grind; and there was no more for the
new mill to do than for the  old. But since Sharkey came they don't grind no
more corn at all. They're always a-hammering and a-letting out a smoke and a
stench, and there isn't no peace even at night  in  Hobbiton.  And they pour
out filth a  purpose; they've  fouled all  the lower Water  and it's getting
down into Brandywine. If they want to make the Shire into a desert,  they're
going the right way about it. I don't believe that fool of a Pimple's behind
all this. It's Sharkey, I say.'
'That's right!' put in Young Tom. 'Why, they even took Pimple's old ma,
that  Lobelia, and he was  fond  of her,  if no one  else was.  Some  of the
Hobbiton folk, they  saw it. She  comes down the lane with her old umbrella.
Some of the ruffians were going up with a big cart.
' "Where be you a-going?" says she.
' "To Bag End," says they.
' "What for?" says she.
' "To put up some sheds for Sharkey," says they.
' "Who said you could?" says she.
' "Sharkey," says they. "So get out o' the road, old hagling!"
'  "I'll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving ruffians!" says  she, and
ups with  her umbrella and goes for the leader. near twice her size. So they
took  her. Dragged her off  to the Lockholes, at her age  too.  They've took
others we miss more, but  there's no  denying she  showed  more  spirit than
most.'
Into the middle of this talk came Sam, bursting in with his gaffer. Old
Gamgee did not look much older, but he was a little deafer.
'Good evening. Mr. Baggins!' he said. 'Glad indeed I am to see you safe
back. But  I've  a bone to pick with you, in a manner  o' speaking, if I may
make so bold. You didn't never ought  to  have a' sold Bag End, as  I always
said. That's what started all the mischief. And while you're been trapessing
in foreign parts, chasing  Black Men  up  mountains from  what my  Sam says,
though what for he don't make clear, they've been and dug up Bagshot Row and
ruined my taters!'
'I  am very  sorry, Mr.  Gamgee,' said Frodo. 'But now I've  come back,
I'll do my best to make amends.'
'Well,  you  can't say  fairer than that,' said  the gaffer. 'Mr.          Frodo
Baggins  is a real gentlehobbit, I always have said, whatever  you may think
of some others of the name, begging your pardon. And I hope my Sam's
behaved
hisself and given satisfaction?'
'Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,'  said Frodo. 'Indeed,  if you  will
believe it, he's  now one of the most famous  people  in all  the lands, and
they are making songs about his deeds from  here to  the Sea and beyond  the
Great River.' Sam blushed,  but he looked gratefully at Frodo,  for  Rosie's
eyes were shining and she was smiling at him.
'It takes a lot o' believing,' said  the gaffer, 'though I can see he's
been mixing in strange company. What's come of his weskit? I don't hold with
wearing ironmongery, whether it wears well or no.'
Farmer  Cotton's household  and  all  his  guests  were  up  early next
morning. Nothing  had  been  heard  in  the  night, but more  trouble  would
certainly  come before the  day was old.  'Seems as if none o' the  ruffians
were left  up at Bag End,' said Cotton; 'but  the gang from Waymeet will  be
along any time now.'
After breakfast  a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was in  high
spirits. 'The Thain has raised  all our country,' he said, 'and the news  is
going like fire all ways. The ruffians that were watching our land have fled
off south, those that escaped alive. The  Thain has gone after them, to hold
off the big gang down  that way; but he's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the
other folk he can spare.'
The next news  was less good. Merry, who had been out  all  night, came
riding in about ten  o'clock. 'There's a big band about four miles away,' he
said.  'They're  coming along the  road from Waymeet, but a good many  stray
ruffians have joined up with them. There must be close on a hundred of them;
and they're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!'
'Ah! This  lot  won't stay to  talk, they'll kill, if they  can,'  said
Farmer  Cotton.  'If Tooks don't come sooner, we'd best get behind cover and
shoot without  arguing.  There's  got to  be  some  fighting  before this is
settled, Mr. Frodo.'
The  Tooks  did come sooner.  Before long  they  marched in, a  hundred
strong,  from  Tuckborough and  the Green Hills with  Pippin at their  head.
Merry now  had  enough  sturdy  hobbitry to deal with  the  ruffians. Scouts
reported  that  they  were  keeping  close  together.  They  knew  that  the
countryside had risen against  them,  and  plainly  meant  to  deal with the
rebellion ruthlessly, at its centre in Bywater. But however grim they, might
be, they  seemed to have  no leader among  them who understood warfare.
They
came on without any precautions. Merry laid his plans quickly.
The ruffians  came tramping along  the  East Road, and  without halting
turned up the Bywater Road,  which ran for  some way sloping up between
high
banks with low hedges on top. Round a bend,  about a  furlong from  the main
road, they met a stout barrier of old farm-carts upturned. That halted them.
At the same  moment they  became aware that  the hedges on  both sides, just
above their  heads, were all lined with hobbits. Behind them  other  hobbits
now pushed out  some more waggons  that had  been  hidden in a field, and so
blocked the way back. A voice spoke to them from above.
'Well, you  have walked into a trap,'  said Merry. 'Your  fellows  from
Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the  rest are prisoners. Lay down
