were left  up at Bag End,' said Cotton; 'but  the gang from Waymeet will  be
along any time now.'
After breakfast  a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was in  high
spirits. 'The Thain has raised  all our country,' he said, 'and the news  is
going like fire all ways. The ruffians that were watching our land have fled
off south, those that escaped alive. The  Thain has gone after them, to hold
off the big gang down  that way; but he's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the
other folk he can spare.'
The next news  was less good. Merry, who had been out  all  night, came
riding in about ten  o'clock. 'There's a big band about four miles away,' he
said.  'They're  coming along the  road from Waymeet, but a good many  stray
ruffians have joined up with them. There must be close on a hundred of them;
and they're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!'
'Ah! This  lot  won't stay to  talk, they'll kill, if they  can,'  said
Farmer  Cotton.  'If Tooks don't come sooner, we'd best get behind cover and
shoot without  arguing.  There's  got to  be  some  fighting  before this is
settled, Mr. Frodo.'
The  Tooks  did come sooner.  Before long  they  marched in, a  hundred
strong,  from  Tuckborough and  the Green Hills with  Pippin at their  head.
Merry now  had  enough  sturdy  hobbitry to deal with  the  ruffians. Scouts
reported  that  they  were  keeping  close  together.  They  knew  that  the
countryside had risen against  them,  and  plainly  meant  to  deal with the
rebellion ruthlessly, at its centre in Bywater. But however grim they, might
be, they  seemed to have  no leader among  them who understood warfare.
They
came on without any precautions. Merry laid his plans quickly.
The ruffians  came tramping along  the  East Road, and  without halting
turned up the Bywater Road,  which ran for  some way sloping up between
high
banks with low hedges on top. Round a bend,  about a  furlong from  the main
road, they met a stout barrier of old farm-carts upturned. That halted them.
At the same  moment they  became aware that  the hedges on  both sides, just
above their  heads, were all lined with hobbits. Behind them  other  hobbits
now pushed out  some more waggons  that had  been  hidden in a field, and so
blocked the way back. A voice spoke to them from above.
'Well, you  have walked into a trap,'  said Merry. 'Your  fellows  from
Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the  rest are prisoners. Lay down
your weapons! Then  go  back twenty paces and sit down. Any who try to
break
out will be shot.'
But  the ruffians could  not now  be  cowed  so easily.  A few of  them
obeyed, but were immediately set on  by their fellows. A score or more broke
back  and  charged the waggons. Six were shot, but the  remainder burst out,
killing two hobbits, and then  scattering across country in the direction of
the  Woody End. Two more fell as they ran.  Merry blew a loud horn-call, and
there were answering calls from a distance.
'They won't get far,' said  Pippin. 'All that country is alive with our
hunters now.'
Behind,  the trapped Men in the lane,  still about four score, tried to
climb the barrier and the banks, and the hobbits were obliged  to shoot many
of them or hew them with axes. But many of the strongest and  most desperate
got out on the west side, and  attacked  their enemies  fiercely,  being now
more  bent on killing than escaping. Several hobbits fell, and the rest were
wavering, when Merry and Pippin,  who were on the east side, came across and
charged  the ruffians. Merry himself slew  the  leader, a  great squint-eyed
brute like  a huge orc.  Then he drew  his forces off,  encircling the  last
remnant of the Men in a wide ring of archers.
At last all  was over.  Nearly  seventy of the ruffians lay dead on the
field, and a dozen  were prisoners. Nineteen hobbits  were killed, and  some
thirty were wounded. The dead  ruffians were laden on waggons and hauled off
to an  old sand-pit nearby and there buried:  in the Battle  Pit, as it  was
afterwards called. The fallen hobbits were  laid together in a grave on  the
hill-side,  where later a great  stone was set up with a garden about it. So
ended the  Battle of Bywater, 1419, the last battle fought in the Shire, and
the  only battle since the  Greenfields, 1147, away up in the Northfarthing.
In consequence, though it happily cost very few lives, it has a  chapter  to
itself in the Red Book, and  the names of all those  who took part were made
into a Roll, and learned by heart by Shire-historians. The very considerable
rise in the fame and fortune of the Cottons dates from this time; but at the
top of the Roll  in all  accounts  stand the names of  Captains Meriadoc and
Peregrin.
Frodo had been in the battle, but he had not drawn sword, and his chief
part had  been to prevent the hobbits  in their wrath at  their losses, from
slaying those  of  their enemies who  threw  down  their  weapons. When  the
fighting  was over,  and  the later labours were ordered, Merry, Pippin, and
Sam joined him, and  they rode back with the Cottons. They ate a late midday
meal, and then Frodo said with a  sigh: 'Well, I suppose it is time now that
we dealt with the "Chief".'
'Yes indeed; the  sooner the better,'  said  Merry.  'And don't be  too
gentle! He's  responsible  for bringing  in these ruffians, and  for all the
evil they have done.'
Farmer Cotton  collected an escort  of some two  dozen  sturdy hobbits.
'For it's only a guess that  there is no ruffians left at Bag End,' he said.
'We don't know.' Then  they set out  on foot. Frodo, Sam,  Merry, and Pippin
led the way.
It was one of the saddest hours  in their lives. The great chimney rose
up  before them;  and as  they drew  near the old  village across the Water,
through rows of new  mean houses along each side of the  road, they saw  the
new mill in all its  frowning and  dirty ugliness:  a  great  brick building
straddling  the  stream, which  it  fouled  with  a  steaming  and  stinking
overflow. All along the Bywater Road every tree had been felled.
As  they crossed the bridge  and looked up the Hill  they  gasped. Even
Sam's vision in the Mirror  had not prepared  him for what they saw. The Old
Grange  on the  west side had been knocked down, and its place taken by rows
of tarred sheds. All the chestnuts were gone. The  banks and  hedgerows were
broken. Great  waggons were standing in  disorder in  a field beaten bare of
grass. Bagshot  Row was a yawning sand and gravel quarry. Bag End up.
beyond
could not be seen for a clutter of large huts.
'They've cut it down!' cried Sam. 'They've cut down the Party Tree!' He
pointed to where the tree. had stood under which Bilbo had made his Farewell
Speech. It was lying lopped and  dead in the field. As if this was the  last
straw Sam burst into tears.
A laugh put an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over  the
low wall of the  mill-yard. He was grimy-faced and  black-handed. 'Don't 'ee
like it, Sam?'  he sneered. 'But  you always  was soft. I thought you'd gone
off in  one o' them ships  you used to prattle about, sailing, sailing. What
d'you want to come back for? We've work to do in the Shire now.'
'So I see,' said Sam. 'No time for washing, but time for wall-propping.
But  see here,  Master  Sandyman,  I've a score to pay in this village,  and
don't you make it any longer with your  jeering, or you'll  foot a bill  too
