fighting  was over,  and  the later labours were ordered, Merry, Pippin, and
Sam joined him, and  they rode back with the Cottons. They ate a late midday
meal, and then Frodo said with a  sigh: 'Well, I suppose it is time now that
we dealt with the "Chief".'
'Yes indeed; the  sooner the better,'  said  Merry.  'And don't be  too
gentle! He's  responsible  for bringing  in these ruffians, and  for all the
evil they have done.'
Farmer Cotton  collected an escort  of some two  dozen  sturdy hobbits.
'For it's only a guess that  there is no ruffians left at Bag End,' he said.
'We don't know.' Then  they set out  on foot. Frodo, Sam,  Merry, and Pippin
led the way.
It was one of the saddest hours  in their lives. The great chimney rose
up  before them;  and as  they drew  near the old  village across the Water,
through rows of new  mean houses along each side of the  road, they saw  the
new mill in all its  frowning and  dirty ugliness:  a  great  brick building
straddling  the  stream, which  it  fouled  with  a  steaming  and  stinking
overflow. All along the Bywater Road every tree had been felled.
As  they crossed the bridge  and looked up the Hill  they  gasped. Even
Sam's vision in the Mirror  had not prepared  him for what they saw. The Old
Grange  on the  west side had been knocked down, and its place taken by rows
of tarred sheds. All the chestnuts were gone. The  banks and  hedgerows were
broken. Great  waggons were standing in  disorder in  a field beaten bare of
grass. Bagshot  Row was a yawning sand and gravel quarry. Bag End up.
beyond
could not be seen for a clutter of large huts.
'They've cut it down!' cried Sam. 'They've cut down the Party Tree!' He
pointed to where the tree. had stood under which Bilbo had made his Farewell
Speech. It was lying lopped and  dead in the field. As if this was the  last
straw Sam burst into tears.
A laugh put an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over  the
low wall of the  mill-yard. He was grimy-faced and  black-handed. 'Don't 'ee
like it, Sam?'  he sneered. 'But  you always  was soft. I thought you'd gone
off in  one o' them ships  you used to prattle about, sailing, sailing. What
d'you want to come back for? We've work to do in the Shire now.'
'So I see,' said Sam. 'No time for washing, but time for wall-propping.
But  see here,  Master  Sandyman,  I've a score to pay in this village,  and
don't you make it any longer with your  jeering, or you'll  foot a bill  too
big for your purse.'
Ted Sandyman spat over the wall: 'Garn!' he said. 'You can't touch  me.
I'm  a friend o'  the  Boss's. But he'll touch you all right, if I have  any
more of your mouth.'
'Don't  waste any more words  on  the  fool, Sam!' said Frodo. 'I  hope
there are not many more hobbits that have become like  this.  It  would be a
worse trouble than all the damage the Men have done.'
'You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,' said Merry. 'And also very much
out of your reckoning. We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious
Boss. We have dealt with his Men.'
Ted gaped, for at  that moment he first caught sight of the escort that
at a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge. Dashing back into the mill
he ran out with a horn and blew it loudly.
'Save your breath!' laughed Merry. 'I've a better.' Then lifting up his
silver horn he winded it, and its clear call rang  over the Hill; and out of
the  holes and sheds and shabby houses of Hobbiton the hobbits answered, and
came pouring out, and  with cheers and loud cries they followed  the company
up the road to Bag End.
At the top of the lane the party halted, and Frodo and his friends went
on; and they came at  last to the once beloved place. The garden was full of
huts and sheds, some so near the old westward windows that  they cut off all
their  light. There were piles of refuse everywhere. The door  was  scarred;
the bell-chain  was dangling  loose, and the bell would not  ring.  Knocking
brought no answer. At length they pushed and the door yielded. They went in.
The  place stank  and was  full of filth and  disorder: it did not appear to
have been used for some time.
'Where  is that miserable Lotho hiding?' said Merry. They  had searched
every room  and found no living thing save rats and  mice. 'Shall we turn on
the others to search the sheds?'
'This is  worse than Mordor!' said Sam. 'Much worse in  a way. It comes
home to you, as  they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it
was all ruined.'
'Yes,  this is Mordor,' said Frodo. 'Just one of its works. Saruman was
doing  its  work all  the time,  even  when he  thought  he was working  for
himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like Lotho.'
Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. 'Let's get out!' he said. 'If
I had known all the  mischief he had caused, I should  have stuffed my pouch
down Saruman's throat.'
'No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I  am  able to welcome you
home.' There standing at the  door was Saruman himself, looking well-fed and
well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and amusement.
A sudden light broke on Frodo. 'Sharkey!' he cried.
Saruman laughed.  'So you have heard the name, have you? All  my people
used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, possibly.(
But evidently you did not expect to see me here.'
'I did not,' said Frodo. 'But I might  have guessed.  A little mischief
in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it.
'Quite  capable,'  said Saruman, 'and more  than a little. You  made me
laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding  along with  all  those  great people so
secure and so pleased with your little selves. You thought you had done very
well out of it all, and could now just amble back and have a nice quiet time
in the country. Saruman's home could  be all wrecked, and he could be turned
out, but no one could touch  yours. Oh  no!  Gandalf would look  after  your
affairs.'
Saruman laughed  again. 'Not he! When his tools have done their task he
drops them. But you must  go dangling  after him,  dawdling and talking, and
riding round twice as far as you needed. "Well," thought I, "if they're such
fools, I  will  get ahead of them and  teach  them  a  lesson.  One ill turn
deserves another." It  would  have been  a  sharper lesson, if  only you had
given  me a  little  more time and more Men. Still  I have already done much
that you will  find  it hard to mend or undo in your lives. And  it  will be
pleasant to think of that and set it against my injuries.'
'Well, if that is what you find  pleasure in,' said Frodo, 'I pity you.
It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never return!'
The hobbits of the villages  had  seen Saruman  come out of one  of the
huts, and at once they came crowding up  to  the door of  Bag End. When they
heard Frodo's command, they murmured angrily:
'Don't let him go! Kill him! He's a villain and a murderer. Kill him!'
Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. 'Kill  him!' he
mocked. 'Kill him, if you think there  are enough of you, my brave hobbits!'
He drew himself  up and stared at them darkly  with his black eyes.  'But do
not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power! Whoever strikes
me shall  be accursed. And if my blood stains the Shire, it shall wither and
never again be healed.'
