down Saruman's throat.'
'No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I  am  able to welcome you
home.' There standing at the  door was Saruman himself, looking well-fed and
well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and amusement.
A sudden light broke on Frodo. 'Sharkey!' he cried.
Saruman laughed.  'So you have heard the name, have you? All  my people
used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, possibly.(
But evidently you did not expect to see me here.'
'I did not,' said Frodo. 'But I might  have guessed.  A little mischief
in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it.
'Quite  capable,'  said Saruman, 'and more  than a little. You  made me
laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding  along with  all  those  great people so
secure and so pleased with your little selves. You thought you had done very
well out of it all, and could now just amble back and have a nice quiet time
in the country. Saruman's home could  be all wrecked, and he could be turned
out, but no one could touch  yours. Oh  no!  Gandalf would look  after  your
affairs.'
Saruman laughed  again. 'Not he! When his tools have done their task he
drops them. But you must  go dangling  after him,  dawdling and talking, and
riding round twice as far as you needed. "Well," thought I, "if they're such
fools, I  will  get ahead of them and  teach  them  a  lesson.  One ill turn
deserves another." It  would  have been  a  sharper lesson, if  only you had
given  me a  little  more time and more Men. Still  I have already done much
that you will  find  it hard to mend or undo in your lives. And  it  will be
pleasant to think of that and set it against my injuries.'
'Well, if that is what you find  pleasure in,' said Frodo, 'I pity you.
It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never return!'
The hobbits of the villages  had  seen Saruman  come out of one  of the
huts, and at once they came crowding up  to  the door of  Bag End. When they
heard Frodo's command, they murmured angrily:
'Don't let him go! Kill him! He's a villain and a murderer. Kill him!'
Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. 'Kill  him!' he
mocked. 'Kill him, if you think there  are enough of you, my brave hobbits!'
He drew himself  up and stared at them darkly  with his black eyes.  'But do
not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power! Whoever strikes
me shall  be accursed. And if my blood stains the Shire, it shall wither and
never again be healed.'
The hobbits recoiled. But Frodo said: 'Do  not believe him! He has lost
all power, save his voice that  can still daunt you and deceive you, if  you
let it.  But  I will not  have him slain. It is useless to meet revenge with
revenge: it will heal nothing. Go, Saruman, by the speediest way!'
'Worm! Worm!' Saruman called; and out of a  nearby hut came
Wormtongue,
crawling, almost like a dog. To the road again, Worm!' said Saruman.  'These
fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again. Come along!'
Saruman turned  to go, and Wormtongue shuffled after  him.  But even as
Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife flashed in his  hand,  and  he stabbed
swiftly.  The blade turned  on  the hidden  mail-coat  and snapped.  A dozen
hobbits, led by Sam, leaped forward with a cry and flung  the villain to the
ground. Sam drew his sword.
'No, Sam!' said  Frodo. 'Do not kill him even now.  For he has not hurt
me.  And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. He was
great once, of  a  noble kind that we  should  not  dare to raise  our hands
against. He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us;  but  I would still  spare
him, in the hope that he may find it.'
Saruman rose to his feet, and stared at Frodo. There was a strange look
in his  eyes of mingled wonder and  respect and  hatred.  'You  have  grown,
Halfling,' he said. 'Yes, you have grown very much. You are wise, and cruel.
You  have  robbed  my revenge of  sweetness,  and  now  I must go  hence  in
bitterness, in debt to your mercy.  I hate it and you! Well, I go and I will
trouble you no more. But do  not expect me to wish you health and long life.
You will have neither. But that is not my doing. I merely foretell.'
He walked away, and  the hobbits made a lane for him to pass; but their
knuckles whitened as  they gripped  on their  weapons. Wormtongue hesitated,
and then followed his master.
'Wormtongue!' called Frodo. 'You need not follow him. I know of no evil
you have done to me. You can  have rest and food here for a while, until you
are stronger and can go your own ways.'
Wormtongue  halted  and  looked  back at  him, half  prepared to  stay.
Saruman turned.  'No evil?'  he  cackled. 'Oh no! Even when he sneaks out at
night it is only to look at the stars. But did I hear someone ask where poor
Lotho is hiding? You know, don't you, Worm? Will you tell them?'
Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered: 'No, no!'
'Then I  will,'  said Saruman.  'Worm killed  your  Chief,  poor little
fellow, your nice little Boss. Didn't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his sleep, I
believe.  Buried him, I hope;  though Worm has been very hungry lately.  No,
Worm is not really nice. You had better leave him to me.'
A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue's red eyes. 'You told me to;
you made me do it,' he hissed.
Saruman laughed. 'You do what Sharkey says,  always, don't  you,  Worm?
Well,  now  he  says:  follow!'  He  kicked  Wormtongue in  the face  as  he
grovelled, and  turned and made off. But at that something snapped: suddenly
Wormtongue rose up, drawing a hidden knife, and then with a snarl like a dog
he sprang on Saruman's back, jerked his head back, cut his throat, and  with
a yell  ran off  down the lane. Before Frodo could recover or  speak a word,
three hobbit-bows twanged and Wormtongue fell dead.
To the dismay of those that stood by, about the  body of Saruman a grey
mist gathered, and  rising slowly to a great height like smoke  from a fire,
as a pale shrouded  figure it loomed over the Hill. For a moment it wavered,
looking to the West; but out of the West came a cold wind, and it bent away,
and with a sigh dissolved into nothing.
Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he looked it
seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in it, and it shrank,
and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a hideous skull. Lifting up
the skirt  of the dirty cloak  that sprawled beside  it, he covered it over,
and turned away.
'And  that's  the end of that,'  said Sam. 'A nasty end,  and I  wish I
needn't have seen it; but it's a good riddance.'
'And the very last end of the War, I hope,' said Merry.
'I hope so,' said Frodo and sighed. 'The very last stroke. But to think
that it  should fall here, at the very  door  of Bag End! Among all my hopes
and fears at least I never expected that.'
'I shan't call it  the end, till we've cleared  up  the mess,' said Sam
gloomily. 'And that'll take a lot of time and work.'
