fellow, your nice little Boss. Didn't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his sleep, I
believe.  Buried him, I hope;  though Worm has been very hungry lately.  No,
Worm is not really nice. You had better leave him to me.'
A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue's red eyes. 'You told me to;
you made me do it,' he hissed.
Saruman laughed. 'You do what Sharkey says,  always, don't  you,  Worm?
Well,  now  he  says:  follow!'  He  kicked  Wormtongue in  the face  as  he
grovelled, and  turned and made off. But at that something snapped: suddenly
Wormtongue rose up, drawing a hidden knife, and then with a snarl like a dog
he sprang on Saruman's back, jerked his head back, cut his throat, and  with
a yell  ran off  down the lane. Before Frodo could recover or  speak a word,
three hobbit-bows twanged and Wormtongue fell dead.
To the dismay of those that stood by, about the  body of Saruman a grey
mist gathered, and  rising slowly to a great height like smoke  from a fire,
as a pale shrouded  figure it loomed over the Hill. For a moment it wavered,
looking to the West; but out of the West came a cold wind, and it bent away,
and with a sigh dissolved into nothing.
Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he looked it
seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in it, and it shrank,
and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a hideous skull. Lifting up
the skirt  of the dirty cloak  that sprawled beside  it, he covered it over,
and turned away.
'And  that's  the end of that,'  said Sam. 'A nasty end,  and I  wish I
needn't have seen it; but it's a good riddance.'
'And the very last end of the War, I hope,' said Merry.
'I hope so,' said Frodo and sighed. 'The very last stroke. But to think
that it  should fall here, at the very  door  of Bag End! Among all my hopes
and fears at least I never expected that.'
'I shan't call it  the end, till we've cleared  up  the mess,' said Sam
gloomily. 'And that'll take a lot of time and work.'
Chapter 9. The Grey Havens
The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work, but  it took  less time
than Sam had feared. The day  after the battle Frodo  rode to Michel Delving
and released the prisoners from  the Lockholes. One  of the first  that they
found was  poor Fredegar Bolger, Fatty no longer. He had been taken when the
ruffians smoked  out a band of rebels that  he  led from their hidings up in
the Brockenbores by the hills of Scary.
'You  would have  done better  to  come with us  after  all,  poor  old
Fredegar!' said Pippin, as they carried him out too weak to walk.
He opened an eye and tried gallantly to  smile. 'Who's this young giant
with the loud voice?' he  whispered. 'Not little Pippin! What's your size in
hats now?'
Then  there  was Lobelia. Poor thing, she looked very old and thin when
they rescued her  from a dark and narrow  cell. She insisted on hobbling out
on her own feet; and she had such a welcome, and there was such clapping and
cheering when she appeared,  leaning on Frodo's arm but still clutching  her
umbrella, that she was quite touched, and drove away in tears. She had never
in her life been popular before. But she was crushed by the news of  Lotho's
murder, and she would' not return to Bag End. She gave it back to Frodo, and
went to her own people, the Bracegirdles of Hardbottle.
When the poor  creature died next Spring-she  was after all more than a
hundred years  old  - Frodo was  surprised and much  moved: she had left all
that remained of her money and of Lotho's for him to use in helping  hobbits
made homeless by the troubles. So that feud was ended.
Old Will Whitfoot had been in the Lockholes longer than any, and though
he had  perhaps  been treated  less harshly  than  some,  he needed a lot of
feeding up before he could look the part of Mayor; so Frodo agreed to act as
his Deputy, until Mr. Whitfoot was  in shape again. The  only  thing that he
did as  Deputy Mayor was  to reduce the Shirriffs to  their proper functions
and numbers. The task of  hunting  out the last remnant of  the ruffians was
left to Merry and  Pippin,  and  it was soon done. The southern gangs, after
hearing the news of the Battle of  Bywater, fled out of the land and offered
little resistance to the Thain. Before the Year's End the few survivors were
rounded  up in  the  woods,  and those  that  surrendered were shown  to the
borders.
Meanwhile the  labour  of  repair went on apace, and  Sam was kept very
busy. Hobbits can work like bees when the mood  and the need comes on
them.
Now  there were thousands of willing  hands of all ages, from the  small but
nimble ones of the hobbit lads and lasses to the well-worn and horny ones of
the gaffers  and gammers.  Before Yule not a brick was left standing of  the
new Shirriff-houses  or of anything that had been built by 'Sharkey's  Men';
but the bricks were used to repair many an old hole, to make it snugger  and
drier. Great stores of goods and  food, and beer,  were found that had  been
hidden away  by  the  ruffians in  sheds and barns and deserted  holes,  and
especially in the tunnels  at Michel  Delving  and  in the  old quarries  at
Scary; so that there was a great deal better cheer that Yule than anyone had
hoped for.
One of the first  things done in Hobbiton,  before even  the removal of
the new mill, was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the  restoration
of Bagshot Row. The front of the new sand-pit was all levelled and made into
a large sheltered garden, and new holes were dug in the southward face, back
into the Hill, and they  were lined with brick. The Gaffer  was  restored to
Number Three; and he said often and did not care who heard it:
'It's an  ill wind as  blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All's
well as ends Better!'
There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given.
Battle  Gardens       was thought  of,  or      Better  Smials    .  But  after a while in
sensible hobbit-fashion it was just called           New Row     . It was a purely  Bywater
joke to refer to it as Sharkey's End.
The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey's bidding they
had been  cut down recklessly far  and wide over the Shire; and Sam  grieved
over this more than anything else. For  one thing, this hurt would take long
to heal, and only  his great-grandchildren, he thought,  would see the Shire
as it ought to be.
Then  suddenly  one day, for he had  been too busy for  weeks to give a
thought to  his adventures,  he remembered the gift of Galadriel. He brought
the box  out and showed it to  the  other Travellers (for  so they were  now
called by everyone), and asked their advice.
'I wondered when you would think of it,' said Frodo. 'Open it!'
Inside it was filled with a grey  dust, soft and fine, in the middle of
