borders.
Meanwhile the  labour  of  repair went on apace, and  Sam was kept very
busy. Hobbits can work like bees when the mood  and the need comes on
them.
Now  there were thousands of willing  hands of all ages, from the  small but
nimble ones of the hobbit lads and lasses to the well-worn and horny ones of
the gaffers  and gammers.  Before Yule not a brick was left standing of  the
new Shirriff-houses  or of anything that had been built by 'Sharkey's  Men';
but the bricks were used to repair many an old hole, to make it snugger  and
drier. Great stores of goods and  food, and beer,  were found that had  been
hidden away  by  the  ruffians in  sheds and barns and deserted  holes,  and
especially in the tunnels  at Michel  Delving  and  in the  old quarries  at
Scary; so that there was a great deal better cheer that Yule than anyone had
hoped for.
One of the first  things done in Hobbiton,  before even  the removal of
the new mill, was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the  restoration
of Bagshot Row. The front of the new sand-pit was all levelled and made into
a large sheltered garden, and new holes were dug in the southward face, back
into the Hill, and they  were lined with brick. The Gaffer  was  restored to
Number Three; and he said often and did not care who heard it:
'It's an  ill wind as  blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All's
well as ends Better!'
There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given.
Battle  Gardens       was thought  of,  or      Better  Smials    .  But  after a while in
sensible hobbit-fashion it was just called           New Row     . It was a purely  Bywater
joke to refer to it as Sharkey's End.
The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey's bidding they
had been  cut down recklessly far  and wide over the Shire; and Sam  grieved
over this more than anything else. For  one thing, this hurt would take long
to heal, and only  his great-grandchildren, he thought,  would see the Shire
as it ought to be.
Then  suddenly  one day, for he had  been too busy for  weeks to give a
thought to  his adventures,  he remembered the gift of Galadriel. He brought
the box  out and showed it to  the  other Travellers (for  so they were  now
called by everyone), and asked their advice.
'I wondered when you would think of it,' said Frodo. 'Open it!'
Inside it was filled with a grey  dust, soft and fine, in the middle of
which was a seed, like a small nut with a  silver shale. 'What can I do with
this?' said Sam.
'Throw it in the air on  a breezy day  and  let it do  its  work!' said
Pippin.
'On what?' said Sam.
'Choose one spot  as  a  nursery, and  see what happens  to the  plants
there,' said Merry.
'But I'm  sure  the Lady  would not like me to keep it all  for my  own
garden, now so many folk have suffered,' said Sam.
'Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,' said Frodo,
'and then  use the  gift to  help  your  work  and  better  it. And  use  it
sparingly. There is not much here, and I expect every grain has a value.'
So Sam planted saplings in all the  places where specially beautiful or
beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of the precious dust in
the soil at the root of each. He went up and  down the Shire in this labour;
but if he  paid special attention to Hobbiton and Bywater no one blamed him.
And  at  the end he found that he still had a little of the dust left; so he
went to the Three-Farthing  Stone, which is as near the centre of the  Shire
as no matter, and cast it  in  the air with his  blessing. The little silver
nut he  planted  in the Party Field where the tree had  once  been;  and  he
wondered  what would  come  of  it. All through  the winter  he remained  as
patient  as  he  could,  and tried  to  restrain himself  from  going  round
constantly to see if anything was happening.
Spring surpassed his wildest hopes. His trees began to sprout and grow,
as if time was in a hurry and  wished to make one year do for twenty. In the
Party Field a beautiful young sapling leaped up: it had silver bark and long
leaves and burst into golden flowers  in April. It was indeed a                 mallorn   , and
it was the wonder of the neighbourhood.  In after years, as it grew in grace
and beauty, it was known far and wide and people would come long journeys
to
see it: the only    mallorn     west of the Mountains and east of the Sea, and one
of the finest in the world.
Altogether 1420 in  the Shire was a marvellous year. Not only was there
wonderful sunshine and delicious rain, in due times and perfect measure, but
there seemed something more: an air of richness and growth, and a gleam of a
beauty  beyond  that  of  mortal summers  that flicker  and  pass  upon this
Middle-earth. All the children born or begotten in that year, and there were
many, were fair to see and strong, and most of them  had a rich golden  hair
that had before  been rare  among hobbits.  The fruit was so  plentiful that
young  hobbits very nearly bathed in  strawberries and cream; and later they
sat on the lawns under the plum-trees  and ate, until they had made piles of
stones  like  small pyramids or  the  heaped skulls of a conqueror, and then
they  moved on. And no  one was ill,  and everyone was pleased. except those
who had to mow the grass.
In the  Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of 'leaf' was
astonishing; and everywhere there was  so much  corn that at  Harvest  every
barn was stuffed. 'The  Northfarthing barley  was so fine  that the beer  of
1420 malt was long remembered and became a byword. Indeed a generation
later
one might hear an  old gaffer  in an inn, after  a good pint  of well-earned
ale,  put  down his mug with a sigh:  'Ah! that was  proper fourteen-twenty,
that was!'
Sam stayed at first at  the Cottons'  with Frodo; but when  the New Row
was ready he went  with the Gaffer. In addition to all his other  labours he
was  busy  directing  the cleaning up and restoring  of Bag End; but he  was
often away in the Shire on his forestry work. So he was not at home in early
March and did not know that  Frodo had  been ill. On the  thirteenth of that
month  Farmer Cotton found Frodo lying on his bed; he was clutching  a white
gem that hung on a chain about his neck and he seemed half in a dream.
'It is gone for ever,' he said, 'and now all is dark and empty.'
But the fit  passed, and  when Sam got back on  the twenty-fifth, Frodo
had  recovered, and he said nothing about  himself. In the meanwhile Bag End
had  been  set  in order,  and Merry and Pippin came over  from  Crickhollow
bringing back  all the old furniture  and gear, so that  the  old hole  soon
looked very much as it always had done.
When all was at last ready Frodo said: 'When are you  going to  move in
and join me, Sam?'
Sam looked a bit awkward.
'There is no need to come yet, if you don't want to,'  said Frodo. 'But
you know the Gaffer  is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after
by Widow Rumble.'
It s not that, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, and he went ver red.
'Well, what is it?'
'It's Rosie, Rose Cotton,' said Sam. 'It seems she didn't like my going
