many, were fair to see and strong, and most of them  had a rich golden  hair
that had before  been rare  among hobbits.  The fruit was so  plentiful that
young  hobbits very nearly bathed in  strawberries and cream; and later they
sat on the lawns under the plum-trees  and ate, until they had made piles of
stones  like  small pyramids or  the  heaped skulls of a conqueror, and then
they  moved on. And no  one was ill,  and everyone was pleased. except those
who had to mow the grass.
In the  Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of 'leaf' was
astonishing; and everywhere there was  so much  corn that at  Harvest  every
barn was stuffed. 'The  Northfarthing barley  was so fine  that the beer  of
1420 malt was long remembered and became a byword. Indeed a generation
later
one might hear an  old gaffer  in an inn, after  a good pint  of well-earned
ale,  put  down his mug with a sigh:  'Ah! that was  proper fourteen-twenty,
that was!'
Sam stayed at first at  the Cottons'  with Frodo; but when  the New Row
was ready he went  with the Gaffer. In addition to all his other  labours he
was  busy  directing  the cleaning up and restoring  of Bag End; but he  was
often away in the Shire on his forestry work. So he was not at home in early
March and did not know that  Frodo had  been ill. On the  thirteenth of that
month  Farmer Cotton found Frodo lying on his bed; he was clutching  a white
gem that hung on a chain about his neck and he seemed half in a dream.
'It is gone for ever,' he said, 'and now all is dark and empty.'
But the fit  passed, and  when Sam got back on  the twenty-fifth, Frodo
had  recovered, and he said nothing about  himself. In the meanwhile Bag End
had  been  set  in order,  and Merry and Pippin came over  from  Crickhollow
bringing back  all the old furniture  and gear, so that  the  old hole  soon
looked very much as it always had done.
When all was at last ready Frodo said: 'When are you  going to  move in
and join me, Sam?'
Sam looked a bit awkward.
'There is no need to come yet, if you don't want to,'  said Frodo. 'But
you know the Gaffer  is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after
by Widow Rumble.'
It s not that, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, and he went ver red.
'Well, what is it?'
'It's Rosie, Rose Cotton,' said Sam. 'It seems she didn't like my going
abroad at all, poor lass; but as I hadn't spoken, she couldn't say so. And I
didn't speak, because I had  a job to  do first. But now I have  spoken, and
she says:  "Well, you've  wasted  a year,  so why wait longer?"  "Wasted?" I
says. "I wouldn't call it that." Still I see what she means. I feel torn  in
two, as you might say.'
'I see,' said Frodo: 'you want to get married, and yet you want to live
with me in  Bag End too? But my dear  Sam, how easy! Get  married as soon as
you  can, and then move in with Rosie. There's room enough in Bag End for as
big a family as you could wish for.'
And so it was settled. Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the Spring  of
1420 (which was  also famous  for its weddings), and they came and lived  at
Bag End. And if Sam thought himself lucky, Frodo knew that he was more
lucky
himself; for there was not a hobbit in the  Shire that was looked after with
such care. When the labours of repair  had all been planned and set going he
took to a quiet life, writing a great deal and  going through all his notes.
He resigned the office of Deputy Mayor at the Free Fair that mid-summer, and
dear old Will Whitfoot had another seven years of presiding at Banquets.
Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow, and there
was  much coming  and  going between  Buckland and Bag  End.  The two
young
Travellers cut a great  dash in the Shire  with  their songs and their tales
and their finery,  and  their wonderful  parties. 'Lordly' folk called them,
meaning nothing but good; for it warmed all hearts to see them go  riding by
with their mail-shirts so bright and their shields so splendid, laughing and
singing songs of far away; and if they were now large and magnificent,  they
were unchanged otherwise, unless they were  indeed  more fairspoken and
more
jovial and full of merriment than ever before.
Frodo and Sam, however, went back to ordinary attire,  except that when
there was need they both wore long grey cloaks,  finely woven and clasped at
the throat with beautiful brooches; and Mr. Frodo wore always a  white jewel
on a chain that he often would finger.
All things now went well, with  hope always of becoming  still  better;
and Sam  was  as busy and as  full of delight as even a hobbit  could  wish.
Nothing for him marred that whole year, except  for some vague anxiety about
his  master. Frodo dropped quietly  out of all the doings of the  Shire, and
Sam was  pained to notice how little  honour he  had in his own country. Few
people  knew  or  wanted  to  know about  his  deeds and  adventures;  their
admiration  and  respect were given mostly  to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin
and (if Sam had known it) to himself. Also in  the  autumn there appeared  a
shadow of old troubles.
One evening Sam came into the  study and  found his master looking very
strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far away.
'What's the matter, Mr. Frodo?' said Sam.
'I am wounded,' he answered, 'wounded; it will never really heal.'
But then  he  got  up, and the  turn seemed to  pass, and he  was quite
himself the next day. It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled that the
date  was October the sixth. Two years before on that day it was dark in the
dell under Weathertop.
Time went on, and 1421 came  in. Frodo was ill again in March, but with
a great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to think about. The
first of  Sam and Rosie's children was born on the twenty-fifth of  March, a
date that Sam noted.
'Well,  Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'I'm in a bit of  a fix.  Rose  and me had
settled  to  call him Frodo, with  your leave; but it's  not             him  , it's  her .
Though as pretty a maidchild  as any one  could hope for, taking after  Rose
more than me, luckily. So we don't know what to do.'
'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo,  'what's wrong with the old customs? Choose a
flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such
names, and what could be better?'
'I  suppose  you're  right,  Mr.  Frodo,'  said  Sam.  'I've heard some
beautiful names on my travels,  but  I  suppose they're  a bit too grand for
daily wear and tear, as you  might say. The Gaffer, he says: "Make it short,
and  then you won't have to cut it short before you can use it." But if it's
to be a  flower-name, then I don't  trouble about  the length: it  must be a
beautiful  flower, because, you see, I  think  she is very beautiful, and is
going to be beautifuller still.'
Frodo  thought  for  a  moment.  'Well,  Sam,  what  about                 elanor  , the
sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlurien?'
'You're  right  again, Mr. Frodo!' said  Sam delighted.  'That's what I
wanted.'
Little  Elanor  was nearly six months  old, and 1421  had passed to its
autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study.
