he  heard two noises; one loud, and the other  soft but very  clear. One was
the  splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast.
He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was  in the water close to the  edge,
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the  jacket, and dragged him  from  under
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once
he woke, and coughed and spluttered.
'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree              threw   me in! I
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!'
'You were dreaming  I expect, Mr. Frodo,'  said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit
in such a place, if you feel sleepy.'
'What  about the  others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder  what sort of  dreams
they are having.'
They went round to the other side of the tree, and  then Sam understood
the click that he had heard. Pippin  had vanished. The crack by which he had
laid himself had closed together, so that  not  a chink could be seen. Merry
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside,
but the  rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of  which  gripped
like a pair of pincers.
Frodo and  Sam beat  first upon the  tree-trunk where Pippin had  lain.
They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held
poor Merry. It was quite useless.
'What a  foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo  wildly. 'Why  did  we ever
come into this dreadful  Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow!' He
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless  of  his own  feet. A hardly
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter.
'I suppose we haven't  got an  axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked
Sam.
'I  brought a  little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That
wouldn't be much use.'
'Wait a minute!'  cried  Sam, struck by an idea suggested by  firewood.
'We might do something with fire!'
'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin
alive inside.'
'We might try  to hurt or  frighten  this tree to begin with,' said Sam
fiercely. 'If it don't let them go,  I'll  have it down,  if  I have to gnaw
it.' He  ran to the ponies and before  long  came back with two tinder-boxes
and a hatchet.
Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits  of bark; and made
a  pile  of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These  they heaped against  the
trunk  on the far side of the tree from  the prisoners. As soon  as Sam  had
struck  a spark into  the tinder,  it kindled the dry grass  and a flurry of
flame and smoke went up. The  twigs crackled. Little fingers  of fire licked
against  the dry scored rind of  the ancient tree and scorched  it. A tremor
ran through the whole  willow. The leaves  seemed to hiss above their  heads
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud  scream came from Merry, and from far
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell.
'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you
don't. He says so!'
'Who?  What?' shouted Frodo,  rushing  round  to  the other side of the
tree.
'Put  it out! Put it  out!'  begged Merry.  The  branches of the willow
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading
outwards  to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they
had  dropped a stone into the quiet slumber  of the river-valley and  set up
ripples  of anger that  ran out  over the  whole  Forest. Sam kicked at  the
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of
why he did so, or what he hoped  for, ran  along the path crying                  help! help!
help!   It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill
voice: it  was  blown away  from  him by  the willow-wind and drowned  in  a
clamour of leaves,  as soon as the  words left his mouth. He felt desperate:
lost and witless.
Suddenly  he  slopped.  There was an answer, or so  he  thought; but it
seemed  to come from  behind him, away down  the  path  further back in  the
Forest.  He turned round and listened, and soon  there  could  be no  doubt:
someone was  singing a song; a deep glad voice  was  singing  carelessly and
happily, but it was singing nonsense:
Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo!
Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow!
Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!
Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both
stood still. Suddenly  out of  a long string of  nonsense-words (or so  they
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song:
Hey! Come merry dot! derry dol! My darling!
Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.
Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,
Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,
There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter,
Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.
Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing
Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing?
Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o,
Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!
Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away!
Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day.
Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing.
Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?
Frodo  and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed  out. The  leaves
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was  another burst of song, and
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there  appeared above the
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into  view a man, or so it
seemed.  At any rate he was  too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not  quite
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for  one,
slumping along with  great yellow  boots on  his  thick legs,  and  charging
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to  drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes  were blue and bright, and his face was red
as  a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred  wrinkles of laughter.  In  his
hands  he carried  on a  large  leaf  as  on a tray  a  small pile  of white
water-lilies.
'Help!' cried  Frodo  and  Sam  running  towards  him with their  hands
stretched out.
'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!' cried the old man, holding up one hand, and
they  stopped  short, as  if  they  had been  struck stiff. 'Now,  my little
fellows, where be you a-going to, puffing like a  bellows? What's the matter
here  then?  Do  you  know who I am? I'm  Tom Bombadil.  Tell me what's
your
