Sam was  pained to notice how little  honour he  had in his own country. Few
people  knew  or  wanted  to  know about  his  deeds and  adventures;  their
admiration  and  respect were given mostly  to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin
and (if Sam had known it) to himself. Also in  the  autumn there appeared  a
shadow of old troubles.
One evening Sam came into the  study and  found his master looking very
strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far away.
'What's the matter, Mr. Frodo?' said Sam.
'I am wounded,' he answered, 'wounded; it will never really heal.'
But then  he  got  up, and the  turn seemed to  pass, and he  was quite
himself the next day. It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled that the
date  was October the sixth. Two years before on that day it was dark in the
dell under Weathertop.
Time went on, and 1421 came  in. Frodo was ill again in March, but with
a great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to think about. The
first of  Sam and Rosie's children was born on the twenty-fifth of  March, a
date that Sam noted.
'Well,  Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'I'm in a bit of  a fix.  Rose  and me had
settled  to  call him Frodo, with  your leave; but it's  not             him  , it's  her .
Though as pretty a maidchild  as any one  could hope for, taking after  Rose
more than me, luckily. So we don't know what to do.'
'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo,  'what's wrong with the old customs? Choose a
flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such
names, and what could be better?'
'I  suppose  you're  right,  Mr.  Frodo,'  said  Sam.  'I've heard some
beautiful names on my travels,  but  I  suppose they're  a bit too grand for
daily wear and tear, as you  might say. The Gaffer, he says: "Make it short,
and  then you won't have to cut it short before you can use it." But if it's
to be a  flower-name, then I don't  trouble about  the length: it  must be a
beautiful  flower, because, you see, I  think  she is very beautiful, and is
going to be beautifuller still.'
Frodo  thought  for  a  moment.  'Well,  Sam,  what  about                 elanor  , the
sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlurien?'
'You're  right  again, Mr. Frodo!' said  Sam delighted.  'That's what I
wanted.'
Little  Elanor  was nearly six months  old, and 1421  had passed to its
autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study.
'It will be Bilbo's Birthday on Thursday, Sam,'  he  said. 'And he will
pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!'
'So he will!' said Sam. 'He's a marvel!'
'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo. 'I want you to see Rose  and  find out if she
can spare  you, so that you and I can go off together.  You can't go  far or
for a long time now, of course,' he said a little wistfully.
'Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo.'
'Of course not.  But never mind.  You can see me on my way.  Tell  Rose
that you won't be away very long, not more than a fortnight; and you'll come
back quite safe.'
'I wish I could go all  the way  with  you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and
see Mr. Bilbo,' said Sam. 'And yet the only place I really want to  be in is
here. I am that torn in two.'
'Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am  afraid,'  said Frodo. 'But you
will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.'
In the next day or  two Frodo went through his papers and  his writings
with Sam, and he handed over his keys.  There was  a big book with plain red
leather  covers; its  tall  pages were  now almost filled.  At the beginning
there were many leaves covered with Bilbo's thin wandering hand; but most of
it was written in Frodo's firm flowing script.  It was divided into chapters
but  Chapter 80 was unfinished, and after that  were some  blank leaves. The
title page had many titles on it, crossed out one after another, so:
My  Diary. My Unexpected  Journey.  There  and  Back  Again.  And  What
Happened After.
Adventures of  Five  Hobbits. The Tale  of the Great  Ring, compiled by
Bilbo  Baggins from his own  observations  and the  accounts of his friends.
What we did in the War of the Ring.
Here Bilbo's hand ended and Frodo had written:
THE DOWNFALL
OF THE
LORD OF THE RINGS
AND THE
RETURN OF THE KING
(as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs  of Bilbo and Frodo of
the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of
the Wise.)
Together  with  extracts from  Books of  Lore  translated by  Bilbo  in
Rivendell.
'Why, you  have  nearly finished  it, Mr. Frodo!' Sam exclaimed. 'Well,
you have kept at it, I must say.'
'I have quite finished, Sam,' said Frodo. 'The last pages are for you.'
On September the twenty-first  they set out together, Frodo on the pony
that  had  borne him  all the  way  from  Minas  Tirith, and was  now called
Strider; and Sam on his beloved Bill. It  was a fair golden morning, and Sam
did not ask where they were going: he thought he could guess.
They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End,
and they let their ponies walk  at their leisure.  They camped  in the Green
Hills,  and  on September the twenty-second  they rode gently down  into the
beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away.
'If that isn't the very tree you hid  behind when the Black Rider first
showed up, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam pointing to the left. 'It seems like a dream
now.'
It  was  evening, and the stars were glimmering  in the  eastern sky as
they passed the ruined oak and turned and went on  down the hill between the
hazel-thickets. Sam  was  silent,  deep in his memories. Presently he became
aware   that  Frodo  was  singing  softly  to  himself,   singing   the  old
walking-song, but the words were not quite the same.
Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate;
And though I oft have passed them by,
A day will come at last when I
Shall take the hidden paths that run
West of the Moon, East of the Sun.
And  as if in answer,  from down below,  coming up the road out of  the
valley, voices sang:
A! Elbereth Gilthoniel!
silivren penna mnriel
o menel aglar elenath,
Gilthoniel, A! Elbereth!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees
