the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of
the Wise.)
Together  with  extracts from  Books of  Lore  translated by  Bilbo  in
Rivendell.
'Why, you  have  nearly finished  it, Mr. Frodo!' Sam exclaimed. 'Well,
you have kept at it, I must say.'
'I have quite finished, Sam,' said Frodo. 'The last pages are for you.'
On September the twenty-first  they set out together, Frodo on the pony
that  had  borne him  all the  way  from  Minas  Tirith, and was  now called
Strider; and Sam on his beloved Bill. It  was a fair golden morning, and Sam
did not ask where they were going: he thought he could guess.
They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End,
and they let their ponies walk  at their leisure.  They camped  in the Green
Hills,  and  on September the twenty-second  they rode gently down  into the
beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away.
'If that isn't the very tree you hid  behind when the Black Rider first
showed up, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam pointing to the left. 'It seems like a dream
now.'
It  was  evening, and the stars were glimmering  in the  eastern sky as
they passed the ruined oak and turned and went on  down the hill between the
hazel-thickets. Sam  was  silent,  deep in his memories. Presently he became
aware   that  Frodo  was  singing  softly  to  himself,   singing   the  old
walking-song, but the words were not quite the same.
Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate;
And though I oft have passed them by,
A day will come at last when I
Shall take the hidden paths that run
West of the Moon, East of the Sun.
And  as if in answer,  from down below,  coming up the road out of  the
valley, voices sang:
A! Elbereth Gilthoniel!
silivren penna mnriel
o menel aglar elenath,
Gilthoniel, A! Elbereth!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees
The starlight on the Western Seas.
Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows, until they saw
a shimmer as the travellers came towards them.
There was Gildor  and  many fair Elven folk; and there  to Sam's wonder
rode Elrond and Galadriel. Elrond wore a  mantle of grey and had a star upon
his forehead, and  a silver harp was in his  hand, and upon his finger was a
ring of gold with a  great blue stone, Vilya, mightiest of  the  Three.  But
Galadriel sat upon a white palfrey  and  was robed all in glimmering  white,
like  clouds  about the Moon; for  she herself seemed  to shine with a  soft
light.  On  her  finger was Nenya, the ring wrought of               mithril  ,  that bore a
single white stone  flickering like a frosty star. Riding slowly behind on a
small grey pony, and seeming to nod in his sleep, was Bilbo himself.
Elrond greeted  them gravely and graciously, and Galadriel  smiled upon
them. 'Well, Master Samwise,'  she said.  'I hear and see that you have used
my  gift well. The Shire shall now be  more than ever blessed  and beloved.'
Sam bowed, but found nothing to say. He had forgotten how beautiful the Lady
was.
Then Bilbo woke up and opened his eyes. 'Hullo, Frodo!' he said. 'Well,
I have passed the  Old Took today! So that's  settled. And now I think I  am
quite ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?'
'Yes, I am coming,' said Frodo. 'The Ring-bearers should go together.'
'Where are you going, Master?' cried Sam, though at last he  understood
what was happening.
'To the Havens, Sam,' said Frodo.
'And I can't come.'
'No, Sam. Not yet anyway, not  further  than the Havens. Though you too
were a Ring-bearer, if only  for a little while. Your  time may come. Do not
be too  sad, Sam. You cannot be always torn in two. You will  have to be one
and whole, for many years. You have so much to enjoy and to be, and to do.'
'But,' said  Sam, and tears started  in his eyes, 'I  thought  you were
going  to  enjoy the  Shire, too.  for years and  years, after all you  have
done.'
'So I thought too, once. But I have been too deeply hurt, Sam. I  tried
to  save the Shire, and it has been saved, but not  for me. It must often be
so, Sam, when things are in danger: some one has to give them up, lose them,
so that others may keep them. But you are my  heir: all that I had and might
have had I leave to you.  And also you  have Rose, and Elanor; and Frodo-lad
will  come,  and  Rosie-lass,  and Merry, and  Goldilocks,  and Pippin;  and
perhaps more  that I  cannot see. Your  hands and  your wits will  be needed
everywhere. You will be the Mayor, of course, as long as you want to be, and
the most famous gardener in history; and you will read things out of the Red
Book, and keep alive the memory of the age that is gone. so that people will
remember the Great Danger and so love their beloved land all the  more.  And
that will  keep  you as busy and as  happy as anyone can be, as long as your
part of the Story goes on.
'Come now, ride with me!'
Then Elrond and  Galadriel rode on; for the Third Age was over, and the
Days of the Rings were passed, and an end was come of the story and  song of
those  times. With them  went many  Elves of the High Kindred  who  would
no
longer stay in  Middle-earth; and among them, filled with a sadness that was
yet  blessed and without bitterness, rode Sam, and Frodo, and Bilbo, and the
Elves delighted to honour them.
Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all
the night, none saw them  pass,  save the wild creatures; or here  and there
some wanderer in the dark who saw a swift  shimmer  under  the trees,  or  a
light and shadow flowing  through the grass as the Moon  went westward.  And
when  they had passed from the  Shire,  going about the  south skirts of the
White Downs, they came to the Far Downs,  and to the Towers,  and  looked on
the  distant Sea; and  so they  rode down at  last to Mithlond,  to the Grey
Havens in the long firth of Lune.
As  they  came  to the gates Cnrdan the Shipwright came  forth to greet
them. Very tall he was,  and his beard  was long, and he  was grey  and old,
save that  his eyes were keen as stars; and he looked at them and bowed, and
said: 'All is now ready.'
Then Cnrdan led  them to the Havens, and there  was a white ship lying,
and upon the  quay  beside a  great  grey horse stood a  figure robed all in
white awaiting them.  As  he turned and came  towards  them  Frodo saw  that
Gandalf now wore openly  upon his  hand the Third Ring, Narya the Great, and
the stone upon it was red as fire.  Then those who were to go were glad, for
they knew that Gandalf also would take ship with them.
But Sam  was now sorrowful at  heart,  and it seemed to him that if the
parting would be bitter,  more grievous  still would  be  the long road home
alone. But  even as they stood there, and the Elves were  going aboard,  and
