Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both
stood still. Suddenly  out of  a long string of  nonsense-words (or so  they
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song:
Hey! Come merry dot! derry dol! My darling!
Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.
Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,
Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,
There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter,
Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.
Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing
Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing?
Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o,
Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!
Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away!
Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day.
Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing.
Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?
Frodo  and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed  out. The  leaves
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was  another burst of song, and
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there  appeared above the
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into  view a man, or so it
seemed.  At any rate he was  too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not  quite
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for  one,
slumping along with  great yellow  boots on  his  thick legs,  and  charging
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to  drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes  were blue and bright, and his face was red
as  a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred  wrinkles of laughter.  In  his
hands  he carried  on a  large  leaf  as  on a tray  a  small pile  of white
water-lilies.
'Help!' cried  Frodo  and  Sam  running  towards  him with their  hands
stretched out.
'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!' cried the old man, holding up one hand, and
they  stopped  short, as  if  they  had been  struck stiff. 'Now,  my little
fellows, where be you a-going to, puffing like a  bellows? What's the matter
here  then?  Do  you  know who I am? I'm  Tom Bombadil.  Tell me what's
your
trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!'
'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly.
'Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!' cried Sam.
'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil,  leaping up  in the air. 'Old Man Willow?
Naught  worse than that, eh? That  can soon  be mended. I know the  tune for
him.  Old  grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his  marrow cold, if he don't behave
himself. I'll  sing his roots off. I'll sing a  wind up  and blow  leaf  and
branch  away.  Old Man  Willow!' Setting down his  lilies carefully  on  the
grass, he  ran to  the tree. There he saw Merry's feet  still sticking out -
the rest had already  been  drawn further inside. Tom  put his mouth to  the
crack  and  began singing  into it in a  low voice. They could not catch the
words, but  evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick.  Tom sprang
away,  and breaking off a hanging branch smote  the side of the  willow with
it. 'You  let  them  out  again, Old  Man Willow!'  he  said. 'What  be  you
a-thinking  of? You  should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water!
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized  Merry's feet and drew him
out of the suddenly widening crack.
There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it
Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then  with  a loud snap both cracks
closed fast again.  A shudder ran  through  the tree  from root to  tip, and
complete silence fell.
'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other.
Tom Bombadil burst out  laughing.  'Well,  my little fellows!' said he,
stooping  so that he peered into their  faces. 'You shall come home with me!
The  table is  all laden with  yellow cream, honeycomb, and white bread  and
butter. Goldberry is  waiting. Time  enough  for questions around the supper
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up
his  lilies, and then with a beckoning  wave  of  his hand  went hopping and
dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically.
Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed  after him
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in
front  of them,  and the noise of his singing got fainter  and further away.
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo!
Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle!
Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle.
Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping.
When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open,
Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.
Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow!
Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you.
Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you!
After that the hobbits heard  no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to
sink  into  the  trees  behind them. They thought of the slanting  light  of
evening glittering on the  Brandywine River, and  the windows  of Bucklebury
beginning  to gleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them;
trunks and branches of trees hung  dark and threatening over the path. White
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the
roots  of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk.
It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on
either  side of them; and if  they looked  up  to the pale sky,  they caught
sight  of  queer  gnarled  and knobbly  faces that gloomed dark against  the
twilight,  and leered down at them  from the high bank and the edges of  the
wood. They  began to feel that  all this  country was unreal,  and that they
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening.
Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed
that the  ground  was  gently  rising.  The  water  began to murmur. In  the
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the  river flowed over
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left
behind. They  stepped out from the  Forest, and found a wide sweep  of grass
welling up before them. The  river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars,  which
were already shining in the sky.
The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge.
The path was now plain before  them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It
wound  up on to the top  of a grassy knoll,  now grey under  the pale starry
night; and there,  still high  above them  on a further slope, they saw  the
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up again, up
a  long smooth  hillside of  turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow
beam  flowed out  brightly  from a  door  that  was  opened.  There  was Tom
Bombadil's  house  before them, up,  down,  under hill. Behind  it  a  steep
shoulder of the land  lay grey and bare,  and beyond that the dark shapes of
