Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.
Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow!
Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you.
Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you!
After that the hobbits heard  no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to
sink  into  the  trees  behind them. They thought of the slanting  light  of
evening glittering on the  Brandywine River, and  the windows  of Bucklebury
beginning  to gleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them;
trunks and branches of trees hung  dark and threatening over the path. White
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the
roots  of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk.
It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on
either  side of them; and if  they looked  up  to the pale sky,  they caught
sight  of  queer  gnarled  and knobbly  faces that gloomed dark against  the
twilight,  and leered down at them  from the high bank and the edges of  the
wood. They  began to feel that  all this  country was unreal,  and that they
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening.
Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed
that the  ground  was  gently  rising.  The  water  began to murmur. In  the
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the  river flowed over
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left
behind. They  stepped out from the  Forest, and found a wide sweep  of grass
welling up before them. The  river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars,  which
were already shining in the sky.
The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge.
The path was now plain before  them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It
wound  up on to the top  of a grassy knoll,  now grey under  the pale starry
night; and there,  still high  above them  on a further slope, they saw  the
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up again, up
a  long smooth  hillside of  turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow
beam  flowed out  brightly  from a  door  that  was  opened.  There  was Tom
Bombadil's  house  before them, up,  down,  under hill. Behind  it  a  steep
shoulder of the land  lay grey and bare,  and beyond that the dark shapes of
the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night.
They  all hurried  forward,  hobbits  and  ponies. Already  half  their
weariness  and all their fears  had fallen from them.              Hey! Come  merry  dol!
rolled out the song to greet them.
Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties!
Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties.
Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together!
Then  another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like  the
song of a glad water flowing  down  into  the night from a bright morning in
the hills, came falling like silver to meet them:
Now let the song begin! Let us sing together
Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather,
Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,
Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather,
Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water:
Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter!
And  with that song the hobbits stood upon  the threshold, and a golden
light was all about them.
Chapter 7. In the House of Tom Bombadil
The four hobbits stepped  over the  wide  stone  threshold,  and  stood
still,  blinking. They  were in a  long  low room,  filled with the light of
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished
wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly.
In a  chair, at the far side of the room  facing  the outer door, sat a
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her  gown was
green,
green as young reeds, shot  with silver like beads  of dew; and her belt was
of gold, shaped like a chain  of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue  eyes of
forget-me-nots.  About  her  feel  in  wide   vessels  of  green  and  brown
earthenware, white water-lilies  were  floating,  so that she  seemed  to be
enthroned in the midst of a pool.
'Enter, good guests!'  she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was
her  clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps further
into  the room,  and  began  to bow  low,  feeling  strangely surprised  and
awkward,  like folk that, knocking at a  cottage door to  beg for a drink of
water, have been answered  by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers.
But  before they could  say anything, she  sprang  lightly up  and  over the
lily-bowls,  and ran  laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled
softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river.
'Come dear  folk!' she said,  taking Frodo by the hand.  'Laugh  and be
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of  the River.' Then lightly she passed them
and closing the door she turned her back to  it, with her  white arms spread
out  across  it. 'Let us  shut out the night!'  she said. 'For you are still
afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things.
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.'
The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and
smiled. 'Fair lady  Goldberry!' said Frodo at last,  feeling his heart moved
with  a joy that he did not understand. He stood  as  he had at times  stood
enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was
different:  less keen and lofty  was the  delight, but deeper and nearer  to
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said
again. 'Now the joy that  was hidden in the songs we heard is  made plain to
