Chapter 7. In the House of Tom Bombadil
The four hobbits stepped  over the  wide  stone  threshold,  and  stood
still,  blinking. They  were in a  long  low room,  filled with the light of
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished
wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly.
In a  chair, at the far side of the room  facing  the outer door, sat a
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her  gown was
green,
green as young reeds, shot  with silver like beads  of dew; and her belt was
of gold, shaped like a chain  of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue  eyes of
forget-me-nots.  About  her  feel  in  wide   vessels  of  green  and  brown
earthenware, white water-lilies  were  floating,  so that she  seemed  to be
enthroned in the midst of a pool.
'Enter, good guests!'  she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was
her  clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps further
into  the room,  and  began  to bow  low,  feeling  strangely surprised  and
awkward,  like folk that, knocking at a  cottage door to  beg for a drink of
water, have been answered  by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers.
But  before they could  say anything, she  sprang  lightly up  and  over the
lily-bowls,  and ran  laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled
softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river.
'Come dear  folk!' she said,  taking Frodo by the hand.  'Laugh  and be
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of  the River.' Then lightly she passed them
and closing the door she turned her back to  it, with her  white arms spread
out  across  it. 'Let us  shut out the night!'  she said. 'For you are still
afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things.
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.'
The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and
smiled. 'Fair lady  Goldberry!' said Frodo at last,  feeling his heart moved
with  a joy that he did not understand. He stood  as  he had at times  stood
enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was
different:  less keen and lofty  was the  delight, but deeper and nearer  to
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said
again. 'Now the joy that  was hidden in the songs we heard is  made plain to
me.
O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water!
O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter!
O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after!
O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves' laughter!'
Suddenly he  stopped  and  stammered,  overcome  with surprise  to hear
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed.
'Welcome!'  she said.  'I had not heard that folk of the  Shire were so
sweet-tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light  in your eyes  and
the ring in your voice tells it. This is  a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait
for the Master  of the house! He will not be long. He is tending  your tired
beasts.'
The hobbits sat down gladly in  low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry
busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slender
grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere  behind
the house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught,  among
many a    derry dol    and a  merry dol     and a  ring a ding dillo     the repeated words:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
'Fair  lady!'  said Frodo again after  a  while. 'Tell me, if my asking
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?'
'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling.
Frodo looked at her questioningly.  'He is, as you  have seen him,' she
said in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.'
'Then all this strange land belongs to him?'
'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be a
burden,'  she added  in  a low voice, as if to herself. 'The trees  and  the
grasses  and  all things growing  or  living  in  the  land belong  each  to
themselves.  Tom  Bombadil is the Master. No  one has ever  caught  old  Tom
walking in the forest,  wading in the  water, leaping on the hill-tops under
light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.'
A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his
thick
brown  hair  was  crowned  with  autumn leaves.  He laughed,  and  going  to
Goldberry, took her hand.
'Here's my pretty  lady!'  he said,  bowing  to the hobbits. 'Here's my
Goldberry clothed all  in silver-green  with flowers in  her girdle! Is  the
table  laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter;
milk, cheese,  and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for
us? Is the supper ready?'
'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?'
Tom clapped his hands and cried:  'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and
you had near forgotten! Come now,  my  merry  friends, and Tom  will refresh
you! You shall clean  grimy  hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!'
He  opened the door, and they followed  him  down  a short passage  and
round  a  sharp  turn. They  came  to  a low  room  with a  sloping  roof (a
penthouse, it  seemed, built on  to  the north end  of the house). Its walls
were  of clean stone, but they were  mostly covered  with green hanging mats
and  yellow curtains. The  floor  was flagged, and  strewn with  fresh green
rushes. There were four deep  mattresses, each  piled  with white  blankets,
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench
laden with wide earthenware basins,  and beside it stood  brown ewers filled
with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set
ready beside each bed.
Before long, washed and  refreshed,  the  hobbits  were  seated  at the
table, two on  each side, while at either end sat Goldberry  and the Master.
It  was  a long and  merry  meal. Though  the hobbits ate, as only  famished
hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed
to be clear cold water, yet it went to  their hearts like  wine and set free
their  voices.  The guests  became  suddenly aware  that  they were  singing
merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking.
At  last Tom  and Goldberry rose and  cleared  the  table  swiftly. The
guests were  commanded to  sit  quiet,  and were set in chairs,  each with a
footstool to  his  tired  feet. There was a  fire  in the wide hearth before
them,  and  it  was  burning with  a  sweet smell, as  if it were  built  of
apple-wood. When  everything  was set in  order,  all the lights in the room
were put  out, except one  lamp  and  a pair of candles at each  end of  the
chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and  stood before them, holding a candle;
and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep.
'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!
For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the
wind  off the hill-top. Good  night!'  She passed  out  of  the room  with a
glimmer and  a rustle. The sound  of her footsteps was like a stream falling
