table  laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter;
milk, cheese,  and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for
us? Is the supper ready?'
'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?'
Tom clapped his hands and cried:  'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and
you had near forgotten! Come now,  my  merry  friends, and Tom  will refresh
you! You shall clean  grimy  hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!'
He  opened the door, and they followed  him  down  a short passage  and
round  a  sharp  turn. They  came  to  a low  room  with a  sloping  roof (a
penthouse, it  seemed, built on  to  the north end  of the house). Its walls
were  of clean stone, but they were  mostly covered  with green hanging mats
and  yellow curtains. The  floor  was flagged, and  strewn with  fresh green
rushes. There were four deep  mattresses, each  piled  with white  blankets,
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench
laden with wide earthenware basins,  and beside it stood  brown ewers filled
with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set
ready beside each bed.
Before long, washed and  refreshed,  the  hobbits  were  seated  at the
table, two on  each side, while at either end sat Goldberry  and the Master.
It  was  a long and  merry  meal. Though  the hobbits ate, as only  famished
hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed
to be clear cold water, yet it went to  their hearts like  wine and set free
their  voices.  The guests  became  suddenly aware  that  they were  singing
merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking.
At  last Tom  and Goldberry rose and  cleared  the  table  swiftly. The
guests were  commanded to  sit  quiet,  and were set in chairs,  each with a
footstool to  his  tired  feet. There was a  fire  in the wide hearth before
them,  and  it  was  burning with  a  sweet smell, as  if it were  built  of
apple-wood. When  everything  was set in  order,  all the lights in the room
were put  out, except one  lamp  and  a pair of candles at each  end of  the
chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and  stood before them, holding a candle;
and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep.
'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!
For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the
wind  off the hill-top. Good  night!'  She passed  out  of  the room  with a
glimmer and  a rustle. The sound  of her footsteps was like a stream falling
gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night.
Tom sat on a while beside  them in silence, while each of them tried to
muster the courage to ask  one of the many questions he had meant to  ask at
supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke:
'Did  you  hear me calling, Master, or was  it just chance that brought
you at that moment?'
Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' said
he. 'Did I  hear you calling?  Nay, I did not hear: I was busy singing. Just
chance brought  me then,  if  chance  you call it.  It was no  plan of mine,
though I was waiting  for you.  We heard  news of you,  and learned that you
were wandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water:  all paths
lead  that  way, down to  Withywindle. Old grey  Willow-man, he's  a  mighty
singer; and it's hard for little folk to escape  his cunning mazes.  But Tom
had an errand there, that he dared not hinder.' Tom  nodded as if sleep  was
taking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice:
I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies,
green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady,
the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter,
to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted.
Each year at summer's end I go to find them for her,
in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;
there they open first in spring and there they linger latest.
By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.
Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating!
He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue:
And that proved well for you -- for now I shall no longer
go down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing
Old Man Willow's house this side of spring-time,
not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter
dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water.
He  fell  silent  again;  but  Frodo  could  not help asking  one  more
question: the one he most desired to have answered.  'Tell  us, Master,'  he
said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.'
'No, don't!' said Merry and  Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright.
'Not now! Not until the morning!'
'That is right!' said the old man.  'Now  is the time for resting. Some
things  are  ill  to hear  when  the  world's  in  shadow.  Sleep  till  the
morning-light, rest on  the  pillow! Heed no nightly  noise!  Fear  no  grey
willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a
candle in either hand he led them out of the room.
Their mattresses and  pillows were soft as down, and  the blankets were
of white  wool. They had hardly laid  themselves on the deep beds and  drawn
the light covers over them before they were asleep.
In the dead night, Frodo lay  in a dream without light. Then he saw the
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall
of  rock, pierced by a  dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that
he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle of
hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood
the figure of  a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a  moment above
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the
dark plain below came the crying  of fell voices, and  the  howling of  many
wolves. Suddenly  a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a  light flashed from the staff that he
wielded. A mighty eagle  swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed
and
the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it
was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.
'Black Riders!'  thought  Frodo as  he wakened, with the  sound of the hoofs
still  echoing in his  mind.  He wondered if  he would ever  again  have the
courage to leave the safety  of these stone walls. He lay  motionless, still
listening;  but all  was now silent, and  at last he turned and fell  asleep
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream.
At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly;  but a change came over his
dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had
waked,
and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his  dream:
tip-tap,  squeak    :  the  noise  was  like  branches  fretting  in  the  wind,
twig-fingers scraping  wall and window:              creak, creak, creak.      He wondered  if
there were  willow-trees close  to  the  house; and  then suddenly he  had a
dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the
willow and listening  to that horrible dry  creaking  voice laughing  at him
