'That is right!' said the old man.  'Now  is the time for resting. Some
things  are  ill  to hear  when  the  world's  in  shadow.  Sleep  till  the
morning-light, rest on  the  pillow! Heed no nightly  noise!  Fear  no  grey
willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a
candle in either hand he led them out of the room.
Their mattresses and  pillows were soft as down, and  the blankets were
of white  wool. They had hardly laid  themselves on the deep beds and  drawn
the light covers over them before they were asleep.
In the dead night, Frodo lay  in a dream without light. Then he saw the
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall
of  rock, pierced by a  dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that
he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle of
hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood
the figure of  a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a  moment above
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the
dark plain below came the crying  of fell voices, and  the  howling of  many
wolves. Suddenly  a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a  light flashed from the staff that he
wielded. A mighty eagle  swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed
and
the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it
was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.
'Black Riders!'  thought  Frodo as  he wakened, with the  sound of the hoofs
still  echoing in his  mind.  He wondered if  he would ever  again  have the
courage to leave the safety  of these stone walls. He lay  motionless, still
listening;  but all  was now silent, and  at last he turned and fell  asleep
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream.
At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly;  but a change came over his
dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had
waked,
and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his  dream:
tip-tap,  squeak    :  the  noise  was  like  branches  fretting  in  the  wind,
twig-fingers scraping  wall and window:              creak, creak, creak.      He wondered  if
there were  willow-trees close  to  the  house; and  then suddenly he  had a
dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the
willow and listening  to that horrible dry  creaking  voice laughing  at him
again. He sat up,  and felt the soft pillows yield to  his hands, and he lay
down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his  ears: 'Fear
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went
to sleep again.
It  was the  sound of  water  that Merry heard falling  into  his quiet
sleep:   water  streaming  down   gently,  and  then   spreading,  spreading
irresistibly all round  the  house  into a  dark shoreless pool. It  gurgled
under the walls, and was  rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he
thought. It will find its  way in,  and then I shall drown.' He felt that he
was  lying  in a soft slimy bog,  and  springing up  he set  his fool on the
corner of  a  cold hard  flagstone. Then he  remembered where he was and lay
down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors  or
windows save moonlight  and  starlight  and  the wind off  the  hill-top.' A
little  breath of sweet air moved  the  curtain. He breathed deep  and  fell
asleep again.
As far  as  he could  remember, Sam slept  through the  night  in  deep
content, if logs are contented.
They woke  up, all four  at  once, in the morning light. Tom was moving
about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clapped
his hands, and cried: 'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drew
back the  yellow curtains, and  the hobbits  saw that these  had covered the
windows, at either end of the room, one looking east  and the other  looking
west.
They leapt up  refreshed. Frodo  ran  to the eastern window, and  found
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to
see turf right up to the  walls, turf all pocked  with hoof-prints. Actually
his view was screened  by a  tall line of beans on poles; but above and  far
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a
pale  morning: in the East,  behind long  clouds like lines  of  soiled wool
stained red at the  edges, lay glimmering deeps of  yellow. The sky spoke of
rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly,  and the red  flowers on
the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves.
Pippin looked out of  the western window, down into a pool of mist. The
Forest  was hidden  under a fog. It was  like looking down  on to  a sloping
cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken
into many plumes and billows; the valley of  the Withywindle. The stream ran
down  the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand
was a flower-garden and a clipped  hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey
shaven grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen.
'Good  morning,  merry  friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a  rainy smell. 'Sun  won't show her face
much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,
since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wet
sky above me.  I wakened Goldberry singing under  window;  but  nought
wakes
hobbit-folk in  the early morning. In the night little  folk wake up in  the
darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring  a  ding dillo! Wake now,  my
merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring  a ding dillo del! derry del,
my  hearties!  If you  come  soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!'
Needless  to  say - not that Tom's threat  sounded  very  serious - the
hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo
look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry  were there. Tom could be heard
about  the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and
singing  here  and  there  outside.  The  room  looked   westward  over  the
mist-clouded valley, and the  window was open. Water dripped  down  from the
thatched  eaves above. Before  they had  finished  breakfast the  clouds had
joined into  an  unbroken roof,  and  a  straight grey rain came softly  and
steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled.
As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear  voice  of Goldberry singing
up above them. They could hear  few  words, but it seemed plain to them that
the  song was a rain-song, as sweet as  showers on dry hills,  that told the
tale  of a river from the  spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his  heart, and blessed
the kindly weather,  because it delayed them from departing. The  thought of
going had been heavy upon him from  the moment  he awoke; but he guessed
now
that they would not go further that day.
The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds  rolled
up  to spill their laden rain on the  bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could
be seen all round the house but  falling  water.  Frodo  stood near the open
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little  river of milk and
