immensely fond  of  you all, and that eleventy-one years is too short a time
to live among such  excellent and  admirable hobbits.                 Tremendous outburst of
approval.
/  don't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less
than half of you half as well as you deserve.            This was unexpected and rather
difficult. There  was some scattered clapping, but most of  them were trying
to work it out and see if it came to a compliment.
Secondly,  to  celebrate my birthday.          Cheers again.  /    should say: OUR
birthday.  For it  is, of  course, also the birthday of my  heir and nephew,
Frodo.  He comes  of  age  and into his inheritance today.                 Some  perfunctory
clapping by the  elders;  and some loud  shouts of 'Frodo!  Frodo! Jolly old
Frodo,' from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what
was  meant by 'coming  into his inheritance'.             Together we score one  hundred
and forty-four.  Your numbers were chosen to  fit this remarkable total: One
Gross, if I may use the  expression.          No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of
his guests, and especially  the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted,  feeling
sure they had only been asked to fill up the  required number, like goods in
a package. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.'
It is also,  if  I  may be  allowed to  refer to  ancient history,  the
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the
fact that it was    my   birthday slipped  my memory on that occasion. I was only
fifty-one  then,  and birthdays did  not seem so important.  The banquet was
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and
could only say 'thag you very  buch'. I now repeat  it more correctly: Thank
you  very  much for coming  to my little party.             Obstinate  silence. They all
feared that  a song or some poetry was now imminent;  and they  were getting
bored. Why couldn't he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo
did not sing or recite. He paused for a moment.
Thirdly and finally,    he said,   I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT.                    He
spoke
this last word so  loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could.
I regret to announce that - though, as I said, eleventy-one years is far too
short a time to spend among you - this is the END. I am going. I  am leaving
NOW. GOOD-BYE!
He stepped down and  vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and
the guests  all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be
seen. One hundred  and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.
Old  Odo Proudfoot  removed his feet from the table and stamped. Then  there
was  a  dead  silence,  until  suddenly, after  several deep breaths,  every
Baggins,  Boffin,   Took,   Brandybuck,   Grubb,  Chubb,  Burrows,   Bolger,
Bracegirdle,  Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower, and  Proudfoot began to
talk
at once.
It  was generally agreed that the joke was  in very bad taste, and more
food and drink were needed to cure the guests  of shock and annoyance. 'He's
mad. I always said so,'  was probably  the  most  popular comment.  Even the
Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought  Bilbo's behaviour was absurd. For the
moment most of  them took it for granted that his disappearance was  nothing
more than a ridiculous prank.
But old Rory Brandybuck was not  so sure. Neither age  nor an  enormous
dinner  had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter-in-law, Esmeralda:
'There's something fishy in this, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off
again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn't taken the vittles with him.'
He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again.
Frodo  was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time  he
had  sat silent  beside  Bilbo's  empty  chair,  and ignored all remarks and
questions. He had enjoyed the  joke,  of course, even  though he had been in
the  know. He had  difficulty  in  keeping  from  laughter at the  indignant
surprise of  the guests.  But  at the  same time he felt deeply troubled: he
realized  suddenly  that he loved the old hobbit  dearly. Most of the guests
went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and
present;  but the Sackville-Bagginses had already  departed in wrath.  Frodo
did not want to have any more  to do with the party. He gave orders for more
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass  silently to the
health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion.
As for Bilbo Baggins,  even while he was making his speech, he had been
fingering the golden ring  in his pocket:  his magic ring that he  had  kept
secret for so many years. As he  stepped  down he slipped it on his  finger,
and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again.
He walked  briskly back to his hole, and stood  for a moment  listening
with a smile to the din in  the pavilion and to the sounds of merrymaking in
other parts  of the field. Then he  went in.  He took off his party clothes,
folded up and wrapped  in tissue-paper his  embroidered  silk waistcoat, and
put it away. Then he put on quickly  some old untidy  garments, and fastened
round his  waist a  worn leather  belt.  On it  he  hung a short sword in  a
battered  black-leather  scabbard.  From  a  locked  drawer,   smelling   of
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if
they were very precious, but they were  so  patched and weatherstained  that
their  original  colour  could hardly be guessed: it might  have  been  dark
green. They were rather too large for him. He then  went into his study, and
from  a  large  strong-box  took out a bundle  wrapped in  old cloths, and a
leather-bound  manuscript; and  also a large bulky  envelope.  The  book and
bundle  he stuffed  into  the top  of a heavy  bag  that was standing there,
already nearly full.  Into the envelope he slipped his  golden ring, and its
fine chain, and then  sealed it, and addressed it  to Frodo. At first he put
it  on the mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed it and  stuck  it in his
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in.
'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.'
'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down  in a
chair, 'I wanted to catch you and have a few final words. I suppose you feel
that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?'
'Yes,  I do,' said  Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it  quite
startled  me,  let alone the  others. A  little  addition  of  your  own,  I
suppose?'
It was. You have  wisely kept that ring secret all these  years, and it
seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to
explain your sudden vanishment.'
'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughed
Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.'
'I do - when I  know  anything. But I  don't  feel too  sure about this
whole affair. It has now come  to the  final point. You have had  your joke,
and alarmed or offended most  of your relations, and  given the whole  Shire
something to talk about for nine  days, or ninety-nine more  likely. Are you
going any further?'
'Yes, I am. I feel  I  need a holiday, a very  long holiday, as I  have
told  you before. Probably  a  permanent holiday:  I  don't expect  I  shall
return. In fact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements.
'I  am  old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in
my heart  of hearts.      Well-preserved       indeed!' he snorted.  'Why, I feel  all
thin, sort of   stretched,   if you  know what I mean: like butter that has been
scraped  over too  much bread.  That can't  be right. I need  a  change,  or
