was a flower-garden and a clipped  hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey
shaven grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen.
'Good  morning,  merry  friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a  rainy smell. 'Sun  won't show her face
much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,
since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wet
sky above me.  I wakened Goldberry singing under  window;  but  nought
wakes
hobbit-folk in  the early morning. In the night little  folk wake up in  the
darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring  a  ding dillo! Wake now,  my
merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring  a ding dillo del! derry del,
my  hearties!  If you  come  soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!'
Needless  to  say - not that Tom's threat  sounded  very  serious - the
hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo
look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry  were there. Tom could be heard
about  the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and
singing  here  and  there  outside.  The  room  looked   westward  over  the
mist-clouded valley, and the  window was open. Water dripped  down  from the
thatched  eaves above. Before  they had  finished  breakfast the  clouds had
joined into  an  unbroken roof,  and  a  straight grey rain came softly  and
steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled.
As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear  voice  of Goldberry singing
up above them. They could hear  few  words, but it seemed plain to them that
the  song was a rain-song, as sweet as  showers on dry hills,  that told the
tale  of a river from the  spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his  heart, and blessed
the kindly weather,  because it delayed them from departing. The  thought of
going had been heavy upon him from  the moment  he awoke; but he guessed
now
that they would not go further that day.
The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds  rolled
up  to spill their laden rain on the  bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could
be seen all round the house but  falling  water.  Frodo  stood near the open
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little  river of milk and
go bubbling away down into the  valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round
the
corner of the house, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain - and
indeed when he sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his
boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then  he  sat in the
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him.
'This is Goldberry's  washing  day,' he said, 'and her autumn-cleaning.
Too wet for hobbit-folk - let them rest while they are able! It's a good day
for  long  tales, for  questions and for  answers,  so Tom  will  start  the
talking.'
He  then  told  them many remarkable  stories,  sometimes  half  as  if
speaking to  himself, sometimes looking at  them suddenly with a bright blue
eye  under  his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would
get  out of  his chair  and  dance about.  He  told them tales of  bees  and
flowers,  the ways of trees, and the strange creatures  of the Forest, about
the  evil things  and good  things,  things  friendly and things unfriendly,
cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles.
As they  listened,  they began to  understand  the lives of the Forest,
apart from themselves, indeed to  feel themselves as the strangers where all
other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out  of his talk was Old
Man  Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed  more
than
enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom's words laid bare the hearts of
trees and their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with
a  hatred of things that go free upon the  earth, gnawing, biting, breaking,
hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called  the Old Forest
without reason,  for  it  was indeed ancient,  a survivor  of vast forgotten
woods;  and  in it there  lived  yet, ageing no quicker than the hills,  the
fathers of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The
countless  years  had  filled  them with pride  and rooted wisdom,  and with
malice.  But none were more dangerous  than the Great Willow:  his heart was
rotten, but his strength was  green; and  he was cunning,  and  a master  of
winds, and his song and thought ran through the woods  on both sides  of the
river.  His grey  thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like
fine root-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till
it had under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest  from the Hedge
to the Downs.
Suddenly  Tom's talk  left  the woods and  went leaping  up  the  young
stream, over  bubbling  waterfalls,  over  pebbles and worn rocks, and among
small flowers in close  grass and wet crannies, wandering at  last up  on to
the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the  green  mounds,  and the
stone-rings  upon the  hills and in the hollows among the hills.  Sheep were
bleating in flocks. Green  walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses
on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young  Sun
shone like fire  on the red metal of their  new and greedy swords. There was
victory and defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went
up into the sky. Gold was piled on the  biers of dead kings and queens;  and
mounds covered them, and the stone  doors were shut; and the grass grew over
all. Sheep  walked  for a while biting the  grass,  but soon the hills  were
empty again.  A  shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were
stirred in  the  mounds.  Barrow-wights walked in  the hollow places  with a
clink of  rings on  cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.'  Stone rings
grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight.
The  hobbits   shuddered.   Even  in  the   Shire  the  rumour  of  the
Barrow-wights of  the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had  been heard. But it
was not a tale that  any  hobbit  liked to listen  to, even by a comfortable
fireside far away. These  four now  suddenly remembered what the joy of this
house had  driven from their minds: the  house of Tom Bombadil nestled under
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They  lost the thread of  his tale
and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another.
When they caught his  words again  they found that he had  now wandered
into  strange regions beyond their  memory and  beyond their waking thought,
into  limes when the world was wider, and  the  seas flowed straight to  the
western  Shore;  and  still on  and back Tom went  singing out  into ancient
starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and
they saw that he nodded  as if he was falling asleep.  The hobbits sat still
before  him, enchanted; and it  seemed as if, under the  spell of his words,
the wind  had gone, and the clouds had  dried  up,  and  the  day  had  been
withdrawn, and darkness  had  come from  East and West, and all  the sky was
filled with the light of white stars.
Whether the morning and evening of  one  day or of many days had passed
Frodo could not tell.  He did not feel either hungry  or tired,  only filled
with  wonder.  The  stars shone through the window and the  silence  of  the
heavens seemed  to be round  him. He spoke at  last out  of his wonder and a
