Suddenly  Tom's talk  left  the woods and  went leaping  up  the  young
stream, over  bubbling  waterfalls,  over  pebbles and worn rocks, and among
small flowers in close  grass and wet crannies, wandering at  last up  on to
the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the  green  mounds,  and the
stone-rings  upon the  hills and in the hollows among the hills.  Sheep were
bleating in flocks. Green  walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses
on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young  Sun
shone like fire  on the red metal of their  new and greedy swords. There was
victory and defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went
up into the sky. Gold was piled on the  biers of dead kings and queens;  and
mounds covered them, and the stone  doors were shut; and the grass grew over
all. Sheep  walked  for a while biting the  grass,  but soon the hills  were
empty again.  A  shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were
stirred in  the  mounds.  Barrow-wights walked in  the hollow places  with a
clink of  rings on  cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.'  Stone rings
grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight.
The  hobbits   shuddered.   Even  in  the   Shire  the  rumour  of  the
Barrow-wights of  the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had  been heard. But it
was not a tale that  any  hobbit  liked to listen  to, even by a comfortable
fireside far away. These  four now  suddenly remembered what the joy of this
house had  driven from their minds: the  house of Tom Bombadil nestled under
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They  lost the thread of  his tale
and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another.
When they caught his  words again  they found that he had  now wandered
into  strange regions beyond their  memory and  beyond their waking thought,
into  limes when the world was wider, and  the  seas flowed straight to  the
western  Shore;  and  still on  and back Tom went  singing out  into ancient
starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and
they saw that he nodded  as if he was falling asleep.  The hobbits sat still
before  him, enchanted; and it  seemed as if, under the  spell of his words,
the wind  had gone, and the clouds had  dried  up,  and  the  day  had  been
withdrawn, and darkness  had  come from  East and West, and all  the sky was
filled with the light of white stars.
Whether the morning and evening of  one  day or of many days had passed
Frodo could not tell.  He did not feel either hungry  or tired,  only filled
with  wonder.  The  stars shone through the window and the  silence  of  the
heavens seemed  to be round  him. He spoke at  last out  of his wonder and a
sudden fear of that silence:
'Who are you, Master?' he asked.
'Eh, what?' said  Tom sitting up,  and  his eyes glinting in the gloom.
'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only  answer. Tell me,  who are you,
alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that's
what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before  the river and the
trees;  Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first  acorn. He made paths
before  the Big  People,  and saw  the  little People arriving.  He was here
before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed
westward, Tom was here already, before the  seas were bent. He knew the dark
under  the stars when it  was  fearless -  before  the Dark  Lord came  from
Outside.'
A shadow seemed to pass by the  window, and the hobbits glanced hastily
through  the  panes.  When they  turned again, Goldberry stood  in the  door
behind,  framed in  light. She held a  candle, shielding its flame  from the
draught  with her hand;  and the  light  flowed through  it,  like  sunlight
through a white shell.
'The  rain has ended,' she said; 'and new waters are running  downhill,
under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!'
'And let us have  food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are  thirsty.
And long listening's hungry work, morning, noon,  and evening!' With that he
jumped  out  of  his  chair,  and  with  a  bound took  a  candle  from  the
chimney-shelf and lit it  in the flame that Goldberry held;  then he  danced
about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared.
Quickly  he returned, bearing a  large and laden  tray.  Then  Tom  and
Goldberry  set the table; and  the  hobbits sat  half in  wonder and half in
laughter: so  fair  was  the grace  of Goldberry  and so  merry and odd  the
caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they  seemed to  weave a single dance,
neither hindering the other, in  and out of  the  room, and  round about the
table; and with great speed food and vessels and  lights were set  in order.
The boards blazed with candles, white and yellow.  Tom bowed to his  guests.
'Supper is ready,'  said Goldberry; and now the  hobbits  saw that  she  was
clothed all in silver with  a white girdle, and her  shoes were like fishes'
mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and
he had green stockings.
It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the spell of
Tom's words may have  missed one meal or many,  but when the food was
before
them it seemed at  least a week  since they had eaten. They did not  sing or
even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after
a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in
mirth and laughter.
After they had eaten,  Goldberry  sang many songs for them, songs  that
began  merrily  in the  hills and fell softly down into  silence; and in the
silences they saw in their minds pools and  waters wider  than any  they had
known, and looking into them they  saw the sky below them and the stars like
jewels in the  depths. Then  once more she wished them  each  good night and
left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them
with
questions.
He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and
indeed  to know much of  all the history  and doings of  the Shire down from
days hardly remembered among the hobbits  themselves. It no longer surprised
them; but he  made no secret that he owed  his  recent knowledge  largely to
Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more  importance
than
they had imagined.  'There's earth under  his  old  feet, and  clay  on  his
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both  his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom  had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some
fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo.
Indeed  so much did Tom know, and so cunning  was his questioning, that
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears
than he  had told before even to  Gandalf. Tom wagged  his head up and down,
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.
'Show me  the  precious  Ring!'  he said suddenly  in the  midst of the
story: and  Frodo, to his  own astonishment,  drew  out the chain  from  his
pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.
It  seemed  to  grow  larger  as  it  lay  for  a  moment  on  his  big
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it  to his eye  and laughed.  For a
second the  hobbits had a vision, both comical and  alarming, of his  bright
blue  eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this.  Then they gasped. There was  no
