Tom's words may have  missed one meal or many,  but when the food was
before
them it seemed at  least a week  since they had eaten. They did not  sing or
even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after
a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in
mirth and laughter.
After they had eaten,  Goldberry  sang many songs for them, songs  that
began  merrily  in the  hills and fell softly down into  silence; and in the
silences they saw in their minds pools and  waters wider  than any  they had
known, and looking into them they  saw the sky below them and the stars like
jewels in the  depths. Then  once more she wished them  each  good night and
left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them
with
questions.
He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and
indeed  to know much of  all the history  and doings of  the Shire down from
days hardly remembered among the hobbits  themselves. It no longer surprised
them; but he  made no secret that he owed  his  recent knowledge  largely to
Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more  importance
than
they had imagined.  'There's earth under  his  old  feet, and  clay  on  his
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both  his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom  had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some
fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo.
Indeed  so much did Tom know, and so cunning  was his questioning, that
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears
than he  had told before even to  Gandalf. Tom wagged  his head up and down,
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.
'Show me  the  precious  Ring!'  he said suddenly  in the  midst of the
story: and  Frodo, to his  own astonishment,  drew  out the chain  from  his
pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.
It  seemed  to  grow  larger  as  it  lay  for  a  moment  on  his  big
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it  to his eye  and laughed.  For a
second the  hobbits had a vision, both comical and  alarming, of his  bright
blue  eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this.  Then they gasped. There was  no
sign of Tom disappearing!
Tom  laughed again,  and then he  spun  the Ring in  the  air  - and it
vanished with a flash. Frodo  gave a cry - and Tom leaned forward and handed
it back to him with a smile.
Frodo looked at it closely, and rather  suspiciously (like one  who has
lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked  the same  and
weighed  the same:  for that  Ring had  always  seemed  to  Frodo  to  weigh
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He
was
perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so  light of what even
Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited  for an opportunity, when
the talk was going again, and Tom  was telling an absurd story about badgers
and their queer ways - then he slipped the Ring on.
Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked
an exclamation.  Frodo was delighted (in a  way):  it was  his own ring  all
right, for Merry was staring blankly  at his  chair, and obviously could not
see him. He  got up and  crept  quietly away from  the  fireside towards the
outer door.
'Hey there!' cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in
his shining eyes. 'Hey!  Come  Frodo, there!  Where be you  a-going? Old Tom
Bombadil's not as blind  as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's
more fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and  sit down beside me!
We
must  talk a while more, and  think about the  morning.  Tom  must teach the
right road, and keep your feet from wandering.'
Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came
and  sat down  again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shine
tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting  out would be hopeful.
But they  would do well to start early; for weather in  that  country was  a
thing  that  even Tom could  not be sure  of  for long, and it would  change
sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket. 'I am no weather-master,'
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs.'
By his  advice  they  decided to make nearly  due North from his house,
over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope  in that way
to strike  the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the  Barrows. He told
them not to be afraid - but to mind their own business.
'Keep to  the green grass. Don't you go  a-meddling  with old stone  or
cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts
that never falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to pass
barrows  by on the west-side, if  they  chanced to stray near  one.  Then he
taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into any danger
or difficulty the next day.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
When they had sung this  altogether after him, he  clapped them each on
the shoulder with  a  laugh,  and taking  candles  led them  back  to  their
bedroom.
