cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts
that never falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to pass
barrows  by on the west-side, if  they  chanced to stray near  one.  Then he
taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into any danger
or difficulty the next day.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
When they had sung this  altogether after him, he  clapped them each on
the shoulder with  a  laugh,  and taking  candles  led them  back  to  their
bedroom.
Chapter 8. Fog on the Barrow-Downs
That night  they heard no noises.  But either in his  dreams or  out of
them,  he could not tell which,  Frodo heard a sweet singing running  in his
mind;  a  song  that  seemed  to  come  like  a  pale  light behind  a  grey
rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver,
until at last it was rolled back, and a  far green country opened before him
under a swift sunrise.
The vision  melted  into  waking; and  there  was  Tom whistling like a
tree-full of birds;  and the  sun was already  slanting  down the  hill  and
through the open window. Outside everything was green and pale gold.
After breakfast, which they  again  ate  alone,  they made ready to say
farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such  a morning: cool,
bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh
from the  North-west. Their quiet  ponies were almost  frisky,  sniffing and
moving  restlessly. Tom came out  of the house and  waved his hat and danced
upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good
speed.
They rode off along a path  that  wound away from behind the house, and
went slanting  up towards the north  end  of  the hill-brow  under which  it
sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their  ponies up the last  steep
slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped.
'Goldberry!' he cried. 'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We have
never said  farewell  to her, nor seen  her  since the evening!' He  was  so
distressed that he turned  back;  but at  that  moment  a  clear  call  came
rippling down. There on the  hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair
was flying loose,  and as it caught the sun it shone and  shimmered. A light
like the glint  of  water on dewy grass  flashed from under her  feet as she
danced.
They hastened up the  last slope, and stood breathless beside her. They
bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they  looked
out from the hill-top  over lands under the morning. It was now as clear and
far-seen as it  had been veiled and misty  when they stood upon the knoll in
the  Forest,  which could now be seen rising pale and green out of  the dark
trees in the West. In that direction the land rose in  wooded ridges, green,
yellow,  russet under  the sun, beyond which lay hidden the  valley  of  the
Brandywine. To the South, over  the  line of  the Withywindle,  there was  a
distant glint like pale glass where  the Brandywine River  made a great loop
in the  lowlands  and  flowed  away  out of  the  knowledge of the  hobbits.
Northward  beyond  the dwindling  downs  the land  ran  away  in  flats  and
swellings of grey  and green and pale earth-colours, until it  faded  into a
featureless and  shadowy  distance.  Eastward  the Barrow-downs  rose, ridge
behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it
was no more  than a guess of  blue and a remote  white glimmer blending with
the hem of the sky,  but it spoke to them, out of  memory  and old tales, of
the high and distant mountains.
They  took a deep draught  of  the air, and felt that a skip and  a few
stout strides would  bear  them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted
to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs  towards the Road,
when they  should be leaping,  as lusty as Tom, over the stepping  stones of
the hills straight towards the Mountains.
Goldberry spoke  to them  and recalled their eyes and thoughts.  'Speed
now, fair guests!'  she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind
in  the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the  Sun
shines!'  And  to Frodo  she  said:  'Farewell,  Elf-friend, it was a  merry
meeting!'
But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony,
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope  behind  the
hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.
The  air  grew warmer between the green walls of hillside  and hillside, and
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when
they reached  the bottom  of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small
and slender like  a sunlit flower  against the  sky: she  was standing still
watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked
she gave a  clear  call,  and lifting  up  her hand she turned  and vanished
behind the hill.
Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet
of a steep hill into  another deeper and  broader  valley, and then over the
shoulder of further hills, and down their long  limbs, and  up  their smooth
sides again, up on to  new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no
tree  nor any visible water: it  was a country  of  grass  and short springy
turf, silent  except for the whisper of the air over the edges  of the land,
