yellow,  russet under  the sun, beyond which lay hidden the  valley  of  the
Brandywine. To the South, over  the  line of  the Withywindle,  there was  a
distant glint like pale glass where  the Brandywine River  made a great loop
in the  lowlands  and  flowed  away  out of  the  knowledge of the  hobbits.
Northward  beyond  the dwindling  downs  the land  ran  away  in  flats  and
swellings of grey  and green and pale earth-colours, until it  faded  into a
featureless and  shadowy  distance.  Eastward  the Barrow-downs  rose, ridge
behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it
was no more  than a guess of  blue and a remote  white glimmer blending with
the hem of the sky,  but it spoke to them, out of  memory  and old tales, of
the high and distant mountains.
They  took a deep draught  of  the air, and felt that a skip and  a few
stout strides would  bear  them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted
to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs  towards the Road,
when they  should be leaping,  as lusty as Tom, over the stepping  stones of
the hills straight towards the Mountains.
Goldberry spoke  to them  and recalled their eyes and thoughts.  'Speed
now, fair guests!'  she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind
in  the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the  Sun
shines!'  And  to Frodo  she  said:  'Farewell,  Elf-friend, it was a  merry
meeting!'
But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony,
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope  behind  the
hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.
The  air  grew warmer between the green walls of hillside  and hillside, and
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when
they reached  the bottom  of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small
and slender like  a sunlit flower  against the  sky: she  was standing still
watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked
she gave a  clear  call,  and lifting  up  her hand she turned  and vanished
behind the hill.
Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet
of a steep hill into  another deeper and  broader  valley, and then over the
shoulder of further hills, and down their long  limbs, and  up  their smooth
sides again, up on to  new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no
tree  nor any visible water: it  was a country  of  grass  and short springy
turf, silent  except for the whisper of the air over the edges  of the land,
and high lonely cries of  strange birds.  As they journeyed the sun mounted,
and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown
less. When they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant  Forest
seemed to be  smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf
and root and mould.  A shadow now lay round the edge of  sight, a dark  haze
above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy.
About mid-day  they  came to  a hill whose top  was wide and flattened,
like a shallow  saucer with a  green mounded rim. Inside  there was  no  air
stirring,  and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode  across and looked
northwards. Then  their hearts rose,  for it seemed plain that they had come
further already than they had expected. Certainly the distances  had now all
become hazy and deceptive, but there could  be no doubt that  the Downs were
coming to  an end. A  long valley  lay below  them winding  away northwards,
until it  came  to  an opening  between two  steep shoulders. Beyond,  there
seemed  to be  no more hills. Due north  they faintly glimpsed  a  long dark
line. That is a line  of trees,' said Merry, 'and that must mark  the  Road.
All  along it for many leagues  east of the Bridge there are  trees growing.
Some say they were planted in the old days.'
'Splendid!'  said Frodo. 'If we make as good going this afternoon as we
have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and
be jogging on in search of a camping place.'  But even as he spoke he turned
his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and
looked down  upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green  mounds,
and on some were standing  stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of
green gums.
That view was somehow disquieting; so they  turned  from  the sight and
went down into  the hollow circle. In  the  midst of it there stood a single
stone, standing  tall  under  the  sun above,  and at this hour  casting  no
shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding
finger, or more like  a  warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun  was
still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of
the stone. It was cool,  as if the sun had  had no power to warm  it; but at
that time this seemed pleasant. There they took food and drink,  and made as
good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for  the food came
from 'down under Hill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of
the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass.
Riding over  the hills,  and eating  their fill, the warm  sun and  the
scent  of  turf,  lying a little  too long, stretching  out  their legs  and
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are,  perhaps,  enough to
explain  what  happened.  However,  that  may  be:  they  woke  suddenly and
uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant  to take. The standing stone
was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward  over them.
The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming  through the mist just above
the  west wall  of the  hollow  in which  they lay; north, south, and  east,
beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy
and  chill. Their ponies  were standing  crowded together  with their  heads
down.
The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm,  and ran to the western rim.
They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out
in  dismay  towards the setting sun, it sank before their  eyes into a white
sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog  rolled up
to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads
until  it  became a roof: they were shut  in a  hall of  mist  whose central
pillar was the standing stone.
They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but  they did  not quite
lose heart. They still remembered  the hopeful view they had had of the line
of the Road ahead,  and they still knew in  which direction it  lay. In  any
case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place  about the stone
that no  thought  of remaining there  was in their minds.  They packed up as
quickly as their chilled fingers would work.
Soon  they were leading their ponies  in single file  over the  rim and
down the long northward slope of  the hill,  down into a foggy sea. As  they
went down the mist  became colder  and damper, and their hair hung lank  and
dripping  on  their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it  was so  cold
that  they halted  and got out cloaks and  hoods, which soon became  bedewed
with  grey drops. Then, mounting  their ponies,  they went  slowly on again,
feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as
well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end
of  the  long valley which  they  had  seen in the  morning.  Once they were
through the  gap, they had only lo keep on in  anything like a straight line
and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go
beyond that, except for a vague hope  that  perhaps  away  beyond the  Downs
there might be no fog.
Their going  was  very slow.  To  prevent their  getting separated  and
