scent  of  turf,  lying a little  too long, stretching  out  their legs  and
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are,  perhaps,  enough to
explain  what  happened.  However,  that  may  be:  they  woke  suddenly and
uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant  to take. The standing stone
was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward  over them.
The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming  through the mist just above
the  west wall  of the  hollow  in which  they lay; north, south, and  east,
beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy
and  chill. Their ponies  were standing  crowded together  with their  heads
down.
The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm,  and ran to the western rim.
They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out
in  dismay  towards the setting sun, it sank before their  eyes into a white
sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog  rolled up
to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads
until  it  became a roof: they were shut  in a  hall of  mist  whose central
pillar was the standing stone.
They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but  they did  not quite
lose heart. They still remembered  the hopeful view they had had of the line
of the Road ahead,  and they still knew in  which direction it  lay. In  any
case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place  about the stone
that no  thought  of remaining there  was in their minds.  They packed up as
quickly as their chilled fingers would work.
Soon  they were leading their ponies  in single file  over the  rim and
down the long northward slope of  the hill,  down into a foggy sea. As  they
went down the mist  became colder  and damper, and their hair hung lank  and
dripping  on  their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it  was so  cold
that  they halted  and got out cloaks and  hoods, which soon became  bedewed
with  grey drops. Then, mounting  their ponies,  they went  slowly on again,
feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as
well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end
of  the  long valley which  they  had  seen in the  morning.  Once they were
through the  gap, they had only lo keep on in  anything like a straight line
and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go
beyond that, except for a vague hope  that  perhaps  away  beyond the  Downs
there might be no fog.
Their going  was  very slow.  To  prevent their  getting separated  and
wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam
was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley
seemed
to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign.  On  either side
ahead a darkness began  to loom  through  the mist; and he guessed that they
were  at  last  approaching  the gap in  the hills,  the north-gate  of  the
Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free.
'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over  his shoulder, and he hurried
forward.  But  his  hope soon  changed  to bewilderment and alarm. The  dark
patches  grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous
before him and leaning  slightly towards one another like the pillars  of  a
headless door, two huge  standing  stones. He could not remember having seen
any sign  of  these in the  valley, when  he looked out from the hill in the
morning. He had passed  between them almost before he was aware: and even
as
he did so  darkness seemed to  fall round him. His pony  reared and snorted,
and he  fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others
had not followed him. 'Sam!' he  called.  'Pippin!  Merry! Come  along!  Why
don't you keep up?'
There was no answer. Fear  took him,  and he ran back  past the  stones
shouting  wildly: 'Sam!  Sam! Merry! Pippin!' The pony bolted into  the mist
and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry:
'Hoy!  Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood  under the
great  stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off  in  the
direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill.
As he struggled  on he called again,  and kept on calling more and more
frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it  seemed faint
and far ahead  and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of
the  mist:  and then  a cry that sounded  like           help, help!     often repeated,
ending  with a  last     help!    that trailed off into a  long wail  suddenly cut
short.  He stumbled forward  with all the speed he could towards  the cries;
but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that
it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time  to be
climbing up and up.
Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when he
at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was  weary, sweating  and yet
chilled. It was wholly dark.
'Where are you?' he cried out miserably.
There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware  that  it
was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy
wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist was flowing  past him
now
in shreds and  tatters. His breath was smoking, and  the darkness  was  less
near and  thick. He looked up  and saw with  surprise  that faint stars were
appearing  overhead amid the  strands of hurrying cloud  and  fog.  The wind
began to hiss over the grass.
He imagined suddenly that he  caught a muffled cry, and he made towards
it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and
the  starry sky  was  unveiled.  A glance showed him  that he was now facing
southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must  have climbed from the
north.  Out  of the east  the  biting wind was blowing. To his  right  there
loomed against the westward stars a dark  black  shape. A great barrow stood
there.
'Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid.
'Here!'  said a voice, deep and cold,  that seemed  to come out of  the
ground. 'I am waiting for you!'
'No!' said Frodo; but  he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell
on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he
looked
up,  in time to see a tall dark  figure like a shadow against the stars.  It
leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a
pale light  that seemed to come from  some  remote  distance.  Then  a  grip
stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and
he remembered no more.
When  he came to  himself again, for a  moment he could  recall nothing
except a sense  of  dread. Then  suddenly  he  knew  that he was imprisoned,
caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A  Barrow-wight had taken him, and he
was probably already under the  dreadful  spells of  the Barrow-wights about
which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself:
flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast.
But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part  of the very
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo
Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the
Shire and  talking about roads and adventures.  There  is  a seed of courage
