'Where are you?' he cried out miserably.
There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware  that  it
was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy
wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist was flowing  past him
now
in shreds and  tatters. His breath was smoking, and  the darkness  was  less
near and  thick. He looked up  and saw with  surprise  that faint stars were
appearing  overhead amid the  strands of hurrying cloud  and  fog.  The wind
began to hiss over the grass.
He imagined suddenly that he  caught a muffled cry, and he made towards
it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and
the  starry sky  was  unveiled.  A glance showed him  that he was now facing
southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must  have climbed from the
north.  Out  of the east  the  biting wind was blowing. To his  right  there
loomed against the westward stars a dark  black  shape. A great barrow stood
there.
'Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid.
'Here!'  said a voice, deep and cold,  that seemed  to come out of  the
ground. 'I am waiting for you!'
'No!' said Frodo; but  he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell
on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he
looked
up,  in time to see a tall dark  figure like a shadow against the stars.  It
leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a
pale light  that seemed to come from  some  remote  distance.  Then  a  grip
stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and
he remembered no more.
When  he came to  himself again, for a  moment he could  recall nothing
except a sense  of  dread. Then  suddenly  he  knew  that he was imprisoned,
caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A  Barrow-wight had taken him, and he
was probably already under the  dreadful  spells of  the Barrow-wights about
which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself:
flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast.
But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part  of the very
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo
Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the
Shire and  talking about roads and adventures.  There  is  a seed of courage
hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid
hobbit, wailing for some final  and desperate danger to  make it grow. Frodo
was neither  very  fat nor very  timid; indeed,  though he did not  know it,
Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him.  He found himself stiffening,  as if for a final spring; he no
longer felt limp like a helpless prey.
As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all
at once  that the darkness was slowly giving way:  a pale greenish light was
growing round him. It did not  at first show him what kind of a place he was
in, for the light  seemed to be  coming out of himself,  and from  the floor
beside  him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He  turned, and there
in  the  cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were
on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale;  and they were  clad in
white. About them lay many treasures, of  gold maybe,  though in that  light
they  looked cold and unlovely.  On their heads  were circlets, gold  chains
were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by
their sides, and shields were  at their feet. But across their  three  necks
lay one long naked sword.
Suddenly a  song began: a cold  murmur, rising and  falling.  The voice
seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin,
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad
but horrible sounds, strings  of words would now and again shape themselves:
grim,  hard,  cold  words,  heartless and miserable. The night  was  railing
against the morning of  which it was bereaved,  and the cold was cursing the
warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while
the song became clearer, and  with  dread in  his heart he perceived that it
had changed into an incantation:
Cold be hand and heart and bone,
and cold be sleep under stone:
never mare to wake on stony bed,
never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.
In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land.
He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself
on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind
of  passage which  behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long  arm
was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest,  and
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him.
At first Frodo felt as if he  had indeed been turned into stone by  the
incantation.  Then a wild thought  of escape came to him. He wondered if  he
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight  would miss him, and he might find
some way out.  He thought  of himself running free  over the grass, grieving
for Merry, and Sam,  and Pippin,  but free and alive  himself. Gandalf would
admit that there had been nothing else he could do.
But the courage that had been  awakened in  him was now  too strong: he
could not  leave his friends so easily.  He wavered, groping  in his pocket,
and then fought with himself again; and as he did so  the arm  crept nearer.
Suddenly  resolve  hardened  in him,  and  he seized a  short sword that lay
beside him, and kneeling he stooped  low over the bodies of  his companions.
With what strength he had he hewed  at the crawling  arm near the wrist, and
the hand broke off; but at the  same moment the sword  splintered up to  the
hilt.  There  was a shriek and the light vanished. In  the  dark there was a
snarling noise.
Frodo fell  forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once
back  into  his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of
the  fog,  came the  memory  of the house down  under the Hill,  and  of Tom
singing. He remembered  the rhyme  that  Tom  had taught  them. In  a  small
desperate voice  he began:         Ho!  Tom  Bombadil!          and with that name his voice
seemed to grow  strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber
echoed as if to drum and trumpet.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
There  was a sudden deep  silence, in which Frodo could hear his  heart
beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was
coming down through the  ground or through thick walls,  an  answering voice
singing:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:
