on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind
of  passage which  behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long  arm
was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest,  and
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him.
At first Frodo felt as if he  had indeed been turned into stone by  the
incantation.  Then a wild thought  of escape came to him. He wondered if  he
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight  would miss him, and he might find
some way out.  He thought  of himself running free  over the grass, grieving
for Merry, and Sam,  and Pippin,  but free and alive  himself. Gandalf would
admit that there had been nothing else he could do.
But the courage that had been  awakened in  him was now  too strong: he
could not  leave his friends so easily.  He wavered, groping  in his pocket,
and then fought with himself again; and as he did so  the arm  crept nearer.
Suddenly  resolve  hardened  in him,  and  he seized a  short sword that lay
beside him, and kneeling he stooped  low over the bodies of  his companions.
With what strength he had he hewed  at the crawling  arm near the wrist, and
the hand broke off; but at the  same moment the sword  splintered up to  the
hilt.  There  was a shriek and the light vanished. In  the  dark there was a
snarling noise.
Frodo fell  forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once
back  into  his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of
the  fog,  came the  memory  of the house down  under the Hill,  and  of Tom
singing. He remembered  the rhyme  that  Tom  had taught  them. In  a  small
desperate voice  he began:         Ho!  Tom  Bombadil!          and with that name his voice
seemed to grow  strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber
echoed as if to drum and trumpet.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
There  was a sudden deep  silence, in which Frodo could hear his  heart
beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was
coming down through the  ground or through thick walls,  an  answering voice
singing:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:
His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster.
There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and  falling, and
suddenly  light  streamed  in,  real  light, the plain light of  day.  A low
door-like opening appeared  at the end of the  chamber beyond  Frodo's feet;
and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of
the sun  rising red  behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the
faces of the three  hobbits lying beside Frodo. They  did not stir,  but the
sickly hue had left them. They  looked now as  if they were only very deeply
asleep.
Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing:
Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight!
Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,
Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!
Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty!
Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness,
Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended.
At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber
fell in  with a crash.  Then  there was  a long trailing shriek, fading away
into an unguessable distance; and after that silence.
'Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean  grass! You
must help me bear them.'
Together  they  carried  out Merry, Pippin, and Sam.  As Frodo left the
barrow  for the last  time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still,
like  a wounded  spider, in a heap of fallen  earth. Tom went back in again,
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he
was
bearing in  his  arms a great  load of  treasure:  things  of  gold, silver,
copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He
climbed
the green barrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine.
There he stood, with his hat in his hand  and the wind in his hair, and
looked down upon the  three hobbits, that had been  laid on their backs upon
the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a
clear and commanding voice:
Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling!
Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen;
Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken.
Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open!
To Frodo's great joy the hobbits  stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed
their eyes, and  then suddenly  sprang up. They  looked  about in amazement,
first  at Frodo, and then at Tom standing  large  as life on  the barrow-top
above  them; and then  at  themselves in their thin  white rags, crowned and
belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.
'What in  the name of  wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet
that had slipped over  one  eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over his
face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he  said. 'The men of
Carn  Dym came on  us at  night,  and  we were worsted. Ah! the spear  in my
heart!'  He  clutched at his  breast. 'No! No!'  he said,  opening his eyes.
'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?'
'I thought that I  was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!'
'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flung
his circlet, belt, and  rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly,  as
if  he  expected  to  find  his  cloak,  jacket,  and  breeches,  and  other
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand.
'You won't find  your clothes again,' said  Tom, bounding down from the
mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the  sunlight. One would have
thought  that  nothing dangerous  or dreadful  had happened;  and indeed the
horror faded  out of their  hearts as they looked at him, and saw the  merry
glint in his eyes.
'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half
amused. 'Why not?'
But Tom shook his  head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out of
the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be
glad,  my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now  heart and limb!
Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a-hunting!'
He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him
Frodo saw him  running away southwards along the green  hollow between
their
hill and the next, still whistling and crying:
Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander?
Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder?
Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin,
White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!
