Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open!
To Frodo's great joy the hobbits  stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed
their eyes, and  then suddenly  sprang up. They  looked  about in amazement,
first  at Frodo, and then at Tom standing  large  as life on  the barrow-top
above  them; and then  at  themselves in their thin  white rags, crowned and
belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.
'What in  the name of  wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet
that had slipped over  one  eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over his
face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he  said. 'The men of
Carn  Dym came on  us at  night,  and  we were worsted. Ah! the spear  in my
heart!'  He  clutched at his  breast. 'No! No!'  he said,  opening his eyes.
'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?'
'I thought that I  was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!'
'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flung
his circlet, belt, and  rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly,  as
if  he  expected  to  find  his  cloak,  jacket,  and  breeches,  and  other
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand.
'You won't find  your clothes again,' said  Tom, bounding down from the
mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the  sunlight. One would have
thought  that  nothing dangerous  or dreadful  had happened;  and indeed the
horror faded  out of their  hearts as they looked at him, and saw the  merry
glint in his eyes.
'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half
amused. 'Why not?'
But Tom shook his  head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out of
the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be
glad,  my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now  heart and limb!
Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a-hunting!'
He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him
Frodo saw him  running away southwards along the green  hollow between
their
hill and the next, still whistling and crying:
Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander?
Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder?
Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin,
White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!
So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat  and catching it, until he
was hidden  by a fold of the ground: but for some time his                 hey now! hoy now!
came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south.
The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran  about for a while
on the grass,  as he  told them. Then they lay basking  in the  sun with the
delight of  those  that have been wafted  suddenly  from bitter winter to  a
friendly clime, or of people that, after  being long ill and bedridden, wake
one day to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of
promise.
By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He
reappeared, hat first, over  the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an
obedient line    six   ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly
old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger,  fatter  (and older)  than their
own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them
any such names, but they answered  to the  new names that Tom had given
them
for the rest of  their  lives. Tom called  them one by  one and they climbed
over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.
'Here are your ponies, now!' he  said.  'They've  more  sense (in  some
ways) than you  wandering hobbits have - more sense in their noses. For they
sniff  danger ahead which  you walk  right  into; and if  they  run to  save
themselves, then they run  the  right  way.  You must forgive  them all; for
though their hearts are faithful, to  face fear of Barrow-wights is not what
they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!'
Merry, Sam,  and Pippin now clothed themselves  in spare  garments from
their  packs; and they soon felt too hot, for  they  were  obliged to put on
some  of  the thicker  and warmer things  that they had  brought against the
oncoming of winter.
'Where  does  that other old  animal, that  Fatty  Lumpkin, come from?'
asked Frodo.
'He's mine,' said  Tom. 'My four-legged  friend;  though I seldom  ride
him,  and he wanders  often far, free upon the  hillsides. When  your ponies
stayed with  me, they  got  to know  my Lumpkin;  and they  smelt him in the
night,  and quickly  ran to meet him. I thought he'd  look for them and with
his words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old
Tom's going to ride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road;
so  he needs a pony. For you  cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding,
when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.'
The hobbits were delighted  to  hear this, and thanked  Tom many times;
but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing themselves that he
would  not  feel happy till he had seen them  safe over  the borders of  his
land. 'I've got  things to  do,' he  said:  'my  making and  my  singing, my
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country.  Tom can't be always
near  to  open doors  and willow-cracks.  Tom  has  his house  to mind,  and
Goldberry is waiting.'
It was still fairly early  by the sun, something between  nine and ten,
and the hobbits turned their minds  to food. Their last meal  had been lunch
beside  the  standing  stone the  day  before. They  breakfasted now off the
remainder of  Tom's provisions,  meant for their supper, with additions that
Tom had brought with him. It was  not a large meal (considering hobbits  and
the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating
Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he
made into a pile that glistened and  sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie
there 'free to  all finders,  birds, beasts. Elves  or Men,  and  all kindly
creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and
no Wight  ever  come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch
set  with  blue  stones,  many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue
butterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his
head, and saying at last:
'Here is a pretty toy for  Tom and for his  lady! Fair was she who long
ago  wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not
forget her!'
For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen,
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold.
They
gleamed as he drew them  from their black sheaths,  wrought of  some strange
metal,  light and  strong, and set with  many fiery stones.  Whether by some
virtue in these sheaths or  because of the spell  that lay on the mound, the
blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun.
'Old  knives are long  enough  as  swords for  hobbit-people,' he said.
'Sharp  blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking, east,  south,  or
far away into dark  and danger.'  Then he told  them that these  blades were
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the
Dark
