when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.'
The hobbits were delighted  to  hear this, and thanked  Tom many times;
but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing themselves that he
would  not  feel happy till he had seen them  safe over  the borders of  his
land. 'I've got  things to  do,' he  said:  'my  making and  my  singing, my
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country.  Tom can't be always
near  to  open doors  and willow-cracks.  Tom  has  his house  to mind,  and
Goldberry is waiting.'
It was still fairly early  by the sun, something between  nine and ten,
and the hobbits turned their minds  to food. Their last meal  had been lunch
beside  the  standing  stone the  day  before. They  breakfasted now off the
remainder of  Tom's provisions,  meant for their supper, with additions that
Tom had brought with him. It was  not a large meal (considering hobbits  and
the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating
Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he
made into a pile that glistened and  sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie
there 'free to  all finders,  birds, beasts. Elves  or Men,  and  all kindly
creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and
no Wight  ever  come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch
set  with  blue  stones,  many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue
butterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his
head, and saying at last:
'Here is a pretty toy for  Tom and for his  lady! Fair was she who long
ago  wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not
forget her!'
For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen,
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold.
They
gleamed as he drew them  from their black sheaths,  wrought of  some strange
metal,  light and  strong, and set with  many fiery stones.  Whether by some
virtue in these sheaths or  because of the spell  that lay on the mound, the
blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun.
'Old  knives are long  enough  as  swords for  hobbit-people,' he said.
'Sharp  blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking, east,  south,  or
far away into dark  and danger.'  Then he told  them that these  blades were
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the
Dark
Lord,  but  they were overcome  by the evil king of Carn Dym in  the Land of
Angmar.
'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured,  'yet  still some  go wandering,
sons of forgotten  kings walking in loneliness,  guarding  from  evil things
folk that are heedless.'
The hobbits  did not understand his  words, but as  he spoke they had a
vision  as it  were of a  great expanse of  years  behind them,  like a vast
shadowy  plain over  which there strode  shapes  of Men, tall and grim  with
bright swords,  and last came  one with a star on his  brow. Then the vision
faded,  and they were back  in the sunlit world. It was time to start again.
They made ready,  packing  their  bags  and lading  their  ponies. Their new
weapons they hung on their  leather belts under  their jackets, feeling them
very awkward, and  wondering  if they would be of  any use. Fighting had not
before occurred to any of  them  as one  of the  adventures  in which  their
flight would land them.
At last  they  set off. They led their ponies down the hill;  and  then
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back and saw the
top of the old mound on the hill, and  from it the sunlight on the gold went
up like a yellow flame. Then they turned  a shoulder of the Downs and it was
hidden from view.
Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great
stones standing like  a gate, and before long they came to the  northern gap
and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry
journey with  Tom Bombadil trotting gaily  beside them, or  before  them, on
Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom
sang
most of the time, but  it  was chiefly  nonsense, or else  perhaps a strange
language unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were
mainly
those of wonder and delight.
They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was further
away  than  they  had  imagined. Even without a fog,  their sleep at mid-day
would have prevented them from reaching it  until after nightfall on the day
before.  The dark line they had seen was  not  a line of trees but a line of
bushes growing on the edge  of a deep dike with  a steep wall on the further
side.  Tom said that it had once been  the boundary of a kingdom, but a very
long lime ago. He seemed to remember  something sad about it, and would  not
say much.
They climbed down  and out  of the dike and through a gap  in the wall,
and then  Tom turned due north, for they  had been  bearing  somewhat to the
west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace,
but  the  sun was already sinking low when at  last  they saw a line of tall
trees  ahead,  and they knew that they had come back  to the Road after many
unexpected adventures.  They galloped their ponies  over  the last furlongs,
and halted under the long shadows of the trees. They  were on  the  top of a
sloping bank,  and  the Road,  now dim as evening drew on, wound away
below
them. At this point  it ran nearly  from South-west  to North-east,  and  on
their right it  fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes  full of
water. They rode down the  bank and looked up and down. There was nothing
to
be  seen. 'Well,  here we  are again at  last!'  said  Frodo. 'I suppose  we
haven't  lost more than two days  by  my short  cut through the Forest!  But
perhaps the delay will prove useful - it may have put them off our trail.'
The others looked at  him.  The shadow of the fear of the  Black Riders
came suddenly over them  again. Ever since they had entered  the Forest they
had thought chiefly of getting back  to  the  Road;  only  now  when it  lay
beneath their feet  did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was
more than likely  to be  lying in wait for  them upon the Road  itself. They
looked anxiously back towards the setting sun,  but  the Road was  brown and
empty.
'Do you  think,'  asked Pippin hesitatingly,  'do you  think we may  be
pursued, tonight?'
'No, I hope not  tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the next
day. But do not trust my guess; for I  cannot tell  for certain. Out east my
knowledge fails. Tom is not master of  Riders from the Black Land far beyond
his country.'
All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt that
he would know how to deal with Black Riders,  if anyone did. They would
soon
now  be going forward  into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but
the  most  vague and  distant  legends  of the Shire, and in  the  gathering
twilight they longed for home. A  deep  loneliness and sense  of loss was on
