round his  waist a  worn leather  belt.  On it  he  hung a short sword in  a
battered  black-leather  scabbard.  From  a  locked  drawer,   smelling   of
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if
they were very precious, but they were  so  patched and weatherstained  that
their  original  colour  could hardly be guessed: it might  have  been  dark
green. They were rather too large for him. He then  went into his study, and
from  a  large  strong-box  took out a bundle  wrapped in  old cloths, and a
leather-bound  manuscript; and  also a large bulky  envelope.  The  book and
bundle  he stuffed  into  the top  of a heavy  bag  that was standing there,
already nearly full.  Into the envelope he slipped his  golden ring, and its
fine chain, and then  sealed it, and addressed it  to Frodo. At first he put
it  on the mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed it and  stuck  it in his
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in.
'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.'
'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down  in a
chair, 'I wanted to catch you and have a few final words. I suppose you feel
that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?'
'Yes,  I do,' said  Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it  quite
startled  me,  let alone the  others. A  little  addition  of  your  own,  I
suppose?'
It was. You have  wisely kept that ring secret all these  years, and it
seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to
explain your sudden vanishment.'
'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughed
Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.'
'I do - when I  know  anything. But I  don't  feel too  sure about this
whole affair. It has now come  to the  final point. You have had  your joke,
and alarmed or offended most  of your relations, and  given the whole  Shire
something to talk about for nine  days, or ninety-nine more  likely. Are you
going any further?'
'Yes, I am. I feel  I  need a holiday, a very  long holiday, as I  have
told  you before. Probably  a  permanent holiday:  I  don't expect  I  shall
return. In fact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements.
'I  am  old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in
my heart  of hearts.      Well-preserved       indeed!' he snorted.  'Why, I feel  all
thin, sort of   stretched,   if you  know what I mean: like butter that has been
scraped  over too  much bread.  That can't  be right. I need  a  change,  or
something.'
Gandalf  looked curiously  and closely at him.  'No,  it does not  seem
right,' he said thoughtfully. 'No, after all I believe your plan is probably
the best.'
'Well, I've made  up  my mind,  anyway. I  want to see mountains again,
Gandalf,    mountains,     and then  find somewhere where I can              rest.  In peace and
quiet, without a lot  of relatives prying around, and a string of confounded
visitors hanging on the bell.  I might find somewhere where I  can finish my
book. I  have thought  of  a nice ending for it:            and he lived happily  ever
after to the end of his days. '
Gandalf laughed. I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, however
it ends.'
'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as
it has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?'
'Yes, I will - two eyes, as often as I can spare them.'
'He would come with  me, of  course, if I asked him. In fact he offered
to once, just before the party. But he does not really want to, yet.  I want
to  see  the  wild country again before I die, and  the Mountains; but he is
still in love with the Shire, with woods and  fields  and  little rivers. He
ought to  be comfortable here. I  am leaving everything  to him,  of course,
except a few oddments. I  hope he will be happy,  when he gets used to being
on his own. It's time he was his own master now.'
'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring  as well? You agreed to that, you
remember.'
'Well, er, yes, I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo.
'Where is it?'
'In an envelope, if you must know,'  said Bilbo impatiently. 'There  on
the mantelpiece. Well,  no! Here it is in  my  pocket!' He hesitated. 'Isn't
that odd now?'  he  said  softly  to himself. 'Yet after all,  why  not? Why
shouldn't it stay there?'
Gandalf looked again very hard  at  Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his
eyes.  'I think, Bilbo,' he said  quietly, 'I should leave  it behind. Don't
you want to?'
'Well yes - and no. Now it comes to it, I don't like parting with it at
all, I may say. And I don't really see why I should. Why do you want me to?'
he asked, and a  curious  change came  over  his voice.  It  was sharp  with
suspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but
you
have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.'
'No, but I had to  badger  you,'  said Gandalf. 'I wanted the truth. It
was  important. Magic  rings  are  - well, magical; and  they are  rare  and
curious. I was  professionally interested in  your ring, you may say;  and I
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also
I  think  you    have had  it quite long  enough. You won't need it  any  more.
Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.'
Bilbo  flushed, and there  was an angry light in  his eyes.  His kindly
face  grew hard. 'Why  not?'  he  cried. 'And what business is it of  yours,
anyway, to know what I  do with my own things? It is my own. I found  it. It
came to me.'
'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.'
'If I am  it  is your  fault,' said Bilbo. 'It is mine, I  tell you. My
own. My precious. Yes, my precious.'
The wizard's face remained grave and attentive,  and  only a flicker in
his deep eyes showed that he  was startled and indeed  alarmed. 'It has been
called that before,' he said, 'but not by you.'
'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It's
not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.'
Gandalf stood  up. He  spoke  sternly. 'You will be  a fool if  you do.
Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has  got
far  too much  hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and  be
free.'
'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately.
'Now, now, my dear hobbit!  ' said Gandalf. 'All your long life we have
been  friends, and you owe me something. Come!  Do as you promised: give  it
up! '
'Well,  if  you  want my ring yourself, say  so!' cried Bilbo. 'But you
won't get it.  I won't give my precious away, I tell  you.' His hand strayed
to the hilt of his small sword.
Gandalf's eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said.
If  you  say  that again,  I shall.  Then  you  will  see Gandalf  the  Grey
uncloaked.'  He took a step towards the hobbit,  and he seemed to  grow tall
and menacing; his shadow filled the little room.
Bilbo backed away  to the  wall, breathing hard, his hand  clutching at
