say much.
They climbed down  and out  of the dike and through a gap  in the wall,
and then  Tom turned due north, for they  had been  bearing  somewhat to the
west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace,
but  the  sun was already sinking low when at  last  they saw a line of tall
trees  ahead,  and they knew that they had come back  to the Road after many
unexpected adventures.  They galloped their ponies  over  the last furlongs,
and halted under the long shadows of the trees. They  were on  the  top of a
sloping bank,  and  the Road,  now dim as evening drew on, wound away
below
them. At this point  it ran nearly  from South-west  to North-east,  and  on
their right it  fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes  full of
water. They rode down the  bank and looked up and down. There was nothing
to
be  seen. 'Well,  here we  are again at  last!'  said  Frodo. 'I suppose  we
haven't  lost more than two days  by  my short  cut through the Forest!  But
perhaps the delay will prove useful - it may have put them off our trail.'
The others looked at  him.  The shadow of the fear of the  Black Riders
came suddenly over them  again. Ever since they had entered  the Forest they
had thought chiefly of getting back  to  the  Road;  only  now  when it  lay
beneath their feet  did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was
more than likely  to be  lying in wait for  them upon the Road  itself. They
looked anxiously back towards the setting sun,  but  the Road was  brown and
empty.
'Do you  think,'  asked Pippin hesitatingly,  'do you  think we may  be
pursued, tonight?'
'No, I hope not  tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the next
day. But do not trust my guess; for I  cannot tell  for certain. Out east my
knowledge fails. Tom is not master of  Riders from the Black Land far beyond
his country.'
All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt that
he would know how to deal with Black Riders,  if anyone did. They would
soon
now  be going forward  into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but
the  most  vague and  distant  legends  of the Shire, and in  the  gathering
twilight they longed for home. A  deep  loneliness and sense  of loss was on
them.  They stood  silent,  reluctant to make  the final  parting, and  only
slowly  became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to
have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting.
'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over  (after that your
own  luck must go with you and  guide you): four miles along the Road you'll
come  upon a village,  Bree under Bree-hill, with  doors  looking  westward.
There you'll  find an  old inn that  is  called         The  Prancing Pony.        Barliman
Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards
the morning  will speed you upon your way.  Be  bold, but wary! Keep up your
merry hearts, and ride to meet your fortune!'
They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and  drink once more
with them; but he laughed and refused, saying:
Tom's country ends here: he will not pass the borders.
Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!
Then  he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's  back, and rode
up over the bank and away singing into the dusk.
The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight.
'I  am sorry  to  take  leave of  Master  Bombadil,' said Sam.  'He's a
caution and  no mistake.  I  reckon  we may go  a  good deal further and see
naught  better,  nor queerer. But  I  won't deny I'll be  glad to  see  this
Prancing  Pony       he spoke of. I hope  it'll be like      The Green Dragon          away back
home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?'
'There  are  hobbits in Bree,'  said Merry,  'as well as  Big  Folk.  I
daresay it will be homelike  enough.           The Pony      is a good inn by all accounts.
My people ride out there now and again.'
'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire
all the same. Don't  make yourselves  too much at home! Please remember -all
of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill,
if any name must be given.'
They now mounted  their ponies and rode off  silently into the evening.
Darkness came down quickly,  as they  plodded slowly  downhill and up again,
until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead.
Before  them rose Bree-hill barring the way,  a dark mass against misty
stars; and under  its western flank nestled a large village. Towards it they
now  hurried desiring only to find a fire,  and a door  between them and the
night.
Chapter 9. At the Sign of
The Prancing Pony
Bree was the chief village of  the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,
like an island in the empty  lands round about. Besides  Bree  itself, there
was Staddle on the  other side of the hill, Combe  in a deep valley a little
further eastward,  and  Archet  on  the  edge of  the Chetwood.  Lying round
Bree-hill and the  villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland
only a few miles broad.
The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad,  and  rather  short, cheerful
and independent: they belonged to  nobody but themselves; but they were more
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of
the world  about them than was (or  is)  usual with Big People. According to
their own tales  they were the original inhabitants and were the descendants
of the first Men that ever wandered  into the West of the  middle-world. Few
had survived the turmoils of  the Elder  Days; but  when the  Kings returned
again over the  Great Sea  they had found the Bree-men still there, and they
were still there now, when the memory  of  the  old Kings had faded into the
grass.
In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing
of
their origin. They  were  taller and darker  than the  Men of Bree  and were
believed  to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards
even as far as  the Misty  Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen.
When  they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange  forgotten
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends
of them.
There were  also many families  of hobbits  in the  Bree-land  and                  they
claimed to be  the oldest  settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that  was
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized.
They  lived  mostly  in  Staddle though  there were  some  in  Bree  itself,
especially on the  higher slopes of the hill, above the  houses of  the Men.
