Chapter 9. At the Sign of
The Prancing Pony
Bree was the chief village of  the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,
like an island in the empty  lands round about. Besides  Bree  itself, there
was Staddle on the  other side of the hill, Combe  in a deep valley a little
further eastward,  and  Archet  on  the  edge of  the Chetwood.  Lying round
Bree-hill and the  villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland
only a few miles broad.
The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad,  and  rather  short, cheerful
and independent: they belonged to  nobody but themselves; but they were more
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of
the world  about them than was (or  is)  usual with Big People. According to
their own tales  they were the original inhabitants and were the descendants
of the first Men that ever wandered  into the West of the  middle-world. Few
had survived the turmoils of  the Elder  Days; but  when the  Kings returned
again over the  Great Sea  they had found the Bree-men still there, and they
were still there now, when the memory  of  the  old Kings had faded into the
grass.
In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing
of
their origin. They  were  taller and darker  than the  Men of Bree  and were
believed  to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards
even as far as  the Misty  Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen.
When  they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange  forgotten
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends
of them.
There were  also many families  of hobbits  in the  Bree-land  and                  they
claimed to be  the oldest  settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that  was
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized.
They  lived  mostly  in  Staddle though  there were  some  in  Bree  itself,
especially on the  higher slopes of the hill, above the  houses of  the Men.
The  Big  Folk and  the  Little Folk  (as they  called one another) were  on
friendly  terms,  minding their  own affairs in  their own  ways,  but  both
rightly regarding  themselves as  necessary parts of the Bree-folk.  Nowhere
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found.
The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did  not themselves travel much; and the
affairs  of the  four villages  were their  chief concern. Occasionally  the
Hobbits  of Bree went as far as  Buckland, or the  Eastfarthing; but  though
their  link land  was not  much  further  than a  day's  riding  east of the
Brandywine Bridge,  the  Hobbits  of the Shire  now seldom  visited  it.  An
occasional Bucklander or  adventurous Took would come  out to  the Inn for a
night  or  two, but  even  that  was  becoming  less  and  less  usual.  The
Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond
the  borders,   as  Outsiders,  and  took  very  little  interest  in  them,
considering them dull  and uncouth. There were probably  many more
Outsiders
scattered about in the West  of the World in those days than  the  people of
the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no  better than  tramps, ready  to
dig a hole in any bank and  stay only as long as it suited them.  But in the
Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and  prosperous, and no more
rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going  between
the
Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts.
The village of Bree had some  hundred  stone houses  of  the Big  Folk,
mostly above the Road, nestling  on the hillside with  windows looking west.
On that side, running in  more  than half a circle from the hill and back to
it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the  inner side.  Over  this
the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred
by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road
ran out of the village. The  gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside
them were small lodges for the gatekeepers.
Down on  the Road, where it swept to the right to  go round the foot of
the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;
another ancient road  crossed  the  East  Road  just outside (he dike at the
western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various
sorts had travelled much on it.         Strange as News from Bree           was still a saying
in the  Eastfarthing, descending from  those days,  when  news  from  North,
South, and East could be heard in the inn,  and when  the Shire-hobbits used
to go more often to hear it.  But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,
and  the  North  Road  was now  seldom  used: it was  grass-grown,  and  the
Bree-folk called it the Greenway.
The Inn  of Bree  was still  there, however, and  the  innkeeper was an
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and
inquisitive  among the inhabitants, large and  small, of the four  villages;
and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.
It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo and  his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the  village.
They came to the West-gate and found it shut, but  at the door  of the lodge
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and  fetched a lantern  and
looked over the gate at them in surprise.
'What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly.
'We are making for  the inn here,' answered Frodo.  'We are  journeying
east and cannot go further tonight.'
'Hobbits! Four  hobbits! And what's more,  out  of  the Shire  by their
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if  speaking to himself. He  stared at
them darkly for a moment, and then slowly  opened the gate and let them ride
through.
'We don't  often see Shire-folk riding on the Road  at  night,' he went
on, as they halted  a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon  my wondering  what
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?'
'Our names and our business are our own,  and this does not seem a good
place to  discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of  the man or  the
tone of his voice.
'Your  business is  your  own, no doubt,'  said  the man; 'but it's  my
business to ask questions after nightfall.'
'We  are hobbits  from Buckland, and we have a  fancy to travel and  to
stay at the  inn here,' put  in Merry. 'I am  Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough
for  you?  The Bree-folk used  to be fair-spoken to travellers,  or so I had
heard.'
'All right, all right!' said the man.  'I  meant no offence. But you'll
find  maybe that more  folk  than old Harry  at the  gate will be asking you
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go  on to               The Pony,     you'll find
