in the  Eastfarthing, descending from  those days,  when  news  from  North,
South, and East could be heard in the inn,  and when  the Shire-hobbits used
to go more often to hear it.  But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,
and  the  North  Road  was now  seldom  used: it was  grass-grown,  and  the
Bree-folk called it the Greenway.
The Inn  of Bree  was still  there, however, and  the  innkeeper was an
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and
inquisitive  among the inhabitants, large and  small, of the four  villages;
and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.
It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo and  his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the  village.
They came to the West-gate and found it shut, but  at the door  of the lodge
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and  fetched a lantern  and
looked over the gate at them in surprise.
'What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly.
'We are making for  the inn here,' answered Frodo.  'We are  journeying
east and cannot go further tonight.'
'Hobbits! Four  hobbits! And what's more,  out  of  the Shire  by their
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if  speaking to himself. He  stared at
them darkly for a moment, and then slowly  opened the gate and let them ride
through.
'We don't  often see Shire-folk riding on the Road  at  night,' he went
on, as they halted  a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon  my wondering  what
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?'
'Our names and our business are our own,  and this does not seem a good
place to  discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of  the man or  the
tone of his voice.
'Your  business is  your  own, no doubt,'  said  the man; 'but it's  my
business to ask questions after nightfall.'
'We  are hobbits  from Buckland, and we have a  fancy to travel and  to
stay at the  inn here,' put  in Merry. 'I am  Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough
for  you?  The Bree-folk used  to be fair-spoken to travellers,  or so I had
heard.'
'All right, all right!' said the man.  'I  meant no offence. But you'll
find  maybe that more  folk  than old Harry  at the  gate will be asking you
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go  on to               The Pony,     you'll find
you're oat the only guests.'
He wished  them  good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see
in  the lantern-light  that the  man was still eyeing them curiously. He was
glad to  hear  the gate clang  to  behind  them,  as they rode  forward.  He
wondered why the man was  so suspicious, and whether any one had been
asking
for  news of   a party of hobbits. Could  it have been Gandalf? He  might  have
arrived, while they  were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was
something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.
The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went back to
his house. As soon as his  back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street.
The  hobbits rode on up a  gentle slope, passing a few detached houses,
and  drew up outside the  inn. The houses looked large  and strange to them.
Sam stared up at the inn  with its three  storeys and many windows, and felt
his  heart sink. He  had imagined  himself meeting giants taller than trees,
and other creatures  even more terrifying, some time or other  in the course
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of  Men and
their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring
day. He  pictured  black horses standing all  saddled in  the shadows of the
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows.
'We  surely aren't going  to stay here for the night,  are we, sir?' he
exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk  in these  pans, why  don't we look for
some that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.'
'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil  recommended it.
I expect it's homelike enough inside.'
Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes.
It had a front on  the Road, and two wings running  back on land partly  cut
out  of the lower  slopes of the hill, so  that at the rear the second-floor
windows were level  with the  ground.  There  was a wide  arch  leading to a
courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the arch there was  a
large doorway reached by  a few  broad  steps. The  door  was open and light
streamed out of it. Above the arch  there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a
large signboard: a  fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door
was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN
BUTTERBUR. Many
of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.
As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing  a  merry
song  inside, and many  cheerful voices  joined loudly in the  chorus.  They
listened  to  this encouraging sound for a moment and  then  got  off  their
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping.
They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving  them standing in the
yard they climbed up  the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a
short fat man with a bald head and a red  face. He had a white apron on, and
was  bustling out of  one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden
with full mugs.
'Can we--' began Frodo.
'Half a minute, if  you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out
again, wiping his hands on his apron.
'Good  evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be
wanting?'
'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies,  if that can be  managed.
Are you Mr. Butterbur?'
'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!
You're from the Shire,  eh?' he said, and  then suddenly he clapped his hand
to  his forehead, as  if  trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried.
'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?'
'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said  Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My
name is Underhill.'
'There  now!' said  Mr.  Butterbur,  snapping  his fingers. 'It's  gone
again! But it'll come back, when I have time to  think. I'm run off my feet;
but I'll see what I can  do for you. We don't often get a party out  of  the
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But  there is
such  a crowd already in the house  tonight  as there  hasn't been for  long
enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree.
'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where  are  you, you woolly-footed  slow-coach?
Nob!'
'Coming,  sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out  of  a door,
and  seeing the  travellers, stopped short and stared  at  them  with  great
interest.
'Where's  Bob?'  asked the landlord.  'You don't  know? Well find  him!
Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted
