As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing  a  merry
song  inside, and many  cheerful voices  joined loudly in the  chorus.  They
listened  to  this encouraging sound for a moment and  then  got  off  their
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping.
They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving  them standing in the
yard they climbed up  the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a
short fat man with a bald head and a red  face. He had a white apron on, and
was  bustling out of  one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden
with full mugs.
'Can we--' began Frodo.
'Half a minute, if  you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out
again, wiping his hands on his apron.
'Good  evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be
wanting?'
'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies,  if that can be  managed.
Are you Mr. Butterbur?'
'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!
You're from the Shire,  eh?' he said, and  then suddenly he clapped his hand
to  his forehead, as  if  trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried.
'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?'
'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said  Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My
name is Underhill.'
'There  now!' said  Mr.  Butterbur,  snapping  his fingers. 'It's  gone
again! But it'll come back, when I have time to  think. I'm run off my feet;
but I'll see what I can  do for you. We don't often get a party out  of  the
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But  there is
such  a crowd already in the house  tonight  as there  hasn't been for  long
enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree.
'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where  are  you, you woolly-footed  slow-coach?
Nob!'
'Coming,  sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out  of  a door,
and  seeing the  travellers, stopped short and stared  at  them  with  great
interest.
'Where's  Bob?'  asked the landlord.  'You don't  know? Well find  him!
Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted
off with a grin and a wink.
'Well, now, what was  I going to  say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his
forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight,
my head is going round. There's  a party that came up the Greenway from
down
South last night - and that was strange enough to begin with. Then there's a
travelling  company  of dwarves  going  West come  in  this evening. And now
there's you.  If you weren't  hobbits, I  doubt  if  we could house you. But
we've  got  a room or two  in the  north wing  that  were made  special  for
hobbits, when this  place was built.  On  the  ground  floor as they usually
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable.
You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!'
He led them a short  way  down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is a
nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that
busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard  work for two legs,
but I  don't get thinner. I'll look  in again  later.  If you want anything,
ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!'
Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed
capable of  an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They  found
themselves in a small and cosy room. There  was a bit of bright fire burning
on  the hearth,  and in front of it  were some low  and comfortable  chairs.
There  was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a
large hand-bell. But  Nob, the  hobbit servant, came bustling in long before
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.
'Will you be wanting anything  to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall
I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?'
They were  washed and in the middle of good deep mugs  of beer when Mr.
Butterbur and  Nob  came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid.  There
was hot soup, cold meats, a  blackberry  tart,  new loaves, slabs of butter,
and half  a ripe  cheese: good plain food, as good  as the Shire could show,
and homelike enough to  dispel  the last of  Sam's misgivings (already  much
relieved by the excellence of the beer).
The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them.
'I don't  know whether  you would care  to  join the company, when  you have
supped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your
,
beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you if  you  had a
mind.  We don't get  Outsiders -  travellers from the  Shire, I should  say,
begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story
or song you may have in mind.  But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack
anything!'
So refreshed and encouraged did  they feel at the end  of  their supper
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit  here quietly by the fire  for  a bit, and
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and  don't
forget that you are supposed to be  escaping in secret, and are still                on  the
high-road and not very far from the Shire!'
'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself!  Don't  get  lost,  and don't
forget that it is safer indoors!'
The company  was in the big common-room  of the inn.  The gathering was
large  and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used  to the light.
This came chiefly from a blazing  log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from
the  beams were  dim,  and half  veiled  in smoke.  Barliman  Butterbur  was
standing  near the  fire, talking  to  a couple  of dwarves and one  or  two
strange-looking  men.  On the benches were  various  folk:  men  of  Bree, a
collection of local  hobbits  (sitting  chattering  together),  a  few  more
dwarves,  and other vague figures difficult to make out away  in the shadows
and comers.
As soon as the Shire-hobbits  entered, there  was  a  chorus of welcome
from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that  had come up the
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to
the Bree-folk, so  quickly  that, though they caught  many  names, they were
seldom  sure who the names belonged to.  The Men of Bree seemed  all to have
rather  botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names,  like Rushlight,
Goatleaf,  Heathertoes,  Appledore, Thistlewool and  Ferny (not  to  mention
Butterbur).  Some  of  the hobbits  had  similar  names.  The  Mugworts, for
instance,  seemed numerous.  But  most of them  had natural  names,  such as
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,  Sandheaver, and Tunnelly,  many of which
were
used  in the Shire.  There were several Underhills  from Saddle, and as they
could not imagine sharing  a name without being  related, they took Frodo to
their hearts as a long-lost cousin.
The Bree-hobbits were,  in fact, friendly  and  inquisitive,  and Frodo
soon found that  some  explanation  of  what he was doing would  have  to be
