begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story
or song you may have in mind.  But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack
anything!'
So refreshed and encouraged did  they feel at the end  of  their supper
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit  here quietly by the fire  for  a bit, and
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and  don't
forget that you are supposed to be  escaping in secret, and are still                on  the
high-road and not very far from the Shire!'
'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself!  Don't  get  lost,  and don't
forget that it is safer indoors!'
The company  was in the big common-room  of the inn.  The gathering was
large  and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used  to the light.
This came chiefly from a blazing  log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from
the  beams were  dim,  and half  veiled  in smoke.  Barliman  Butterbur  was
standing  near the  fire, talking  to  a couple  of dwarves and one  or  two
strange-looking  men.  On the benches were  various  folk:  men  of  Bree, a
collection of local  hobbits  (sitting  chattering  together),  a  few  more
dwarves,  and other vague figures difficult to make out away  in the shadows
and comers.
As soon as the Shire-hobbits  entered, there  was  a  chorus of welcome
from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that  had come up the
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to
the Bree-folk, so  quickly  that, though they caught  many  names, they were
seldom  sure who the names belonged to.  The Men of Bree seemed  all to have
rather  botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names,  like Rushlight,
Goatleaf,  Heathertoes,  Appledore, Thistlewool and  Ferny (not  to  mention
Butterbur).  Some  of  the hobbits  had  similar  names.  The  Mugworts, for
instance,  seemed numerous.  But  most of them  had natural  names,  such as
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,  Sandheaver, and Tunnelly,  many of which
were
used  in the Shire.  There were several Underhills  from Saddle, and as they
could not imagine sharing  a name without being  related, they took Frodo to
their hearts as a long-lost cousin.
The Bree-hobbits were,  in fact, friendly  and  inquisitive,  and Frodo
soon found that  some  explanation  of  what he was doing would  have  to be
given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which
there was much wagging of heads, although neither  of these words  were much
used in the  Bree-dialect). He said  he  was thinking of writing a  book (at
which there was silent astonishment),            and   that he and his friends  wanted to
collect information about  hobbits living  outside the Shire,  especially in
the eastern lands.
At this  a  chorus of voices broke  out. If Frodo had  really wanted to
write a  book,  and  had  had  many ears, he  would  have learned enough for
several chapters  in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given
a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he  could
go for further information. But after a time, as Frodo did not show any                    sign
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about
doings in  the Shire. Frodo did not  prove  very communicative,  and he soon
found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around.
The Men and  Dwarves were mostly talking of  distant events and telling
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There  was trouble away
in the South, and it seemed that the  Men who had  come up the Greenway
were
on  the  move,  looking for  lands  where they  could  find some  peace. The
Bree-folk were  sympathetic, but plainly  not  very  ready to  take  a large
number  of  strangers  into  their little land. One  of  the  travellers,  a
squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was foretelling  that more  and more people
would  be  coming north in  the near future. 'If  room isn't found for them,
they'll  find it for  themselves.  They've a  right  to live,  same as other
folk,'  he said  loudly. The  local inhabitants did not look  pleased at the
prospect.
The hobbits  did not pay much attention to all this,  and it did not at
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big  Folk could hardly  beg for lodgings
in hobbit-holes. They were more  interested in Sam and Pippin,  who were now
feeling quite  at home, and were chatting  gaily about events in the  Shire.
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the
roof of the Town  Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor,  and the
fattest hobbit  in the Westfarthing, had  been buried in chalk, and came out
like a floured  dumpling. But there were several questions asked  that  made
Frodo a little uneasy. One of  the Bree-landers, who seemed to  have been in
the Shire  several times, wanted to know where the  Underhills lived and who
they were related to.
Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather-beaten man,
sitting in  the  shadows near the  wall, was  also listening intently to the
hobbit-talk. He had  a  tall tankard  in  front of him, and  was  smoking  a
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs  were stretched out before him,
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-
green
cloth was  drawn  close  about him, and in spite of the heat of the room  he
wore a hood  that overshadowed his  face; but the gleam of his eyes could be
seen as he watched the hobbits.
'Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he  got  a chance  to  whisper  to Mr.
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?'
'Him?' said  the  landlord in  an  answering whisper,  cocking  an  eye
without  turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he
pops  up again. He was in and out  pretty  often last spring; but I  haven't
seen  him about lately. What his  right name is I've  never  heard: but he's
known round here as Strider. Goes  about at a great pace on his long shanks;
though  he  don't  tell nobody what cause  he has to hurry.  But there's  no
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you  should  ask about  him.' But  at
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away  by a demand for more ale  and his
last remark remained unexplained.
Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he  had heard or
guessed  all that had been said.  Presently,  with a wave of his hand and  a
nod, he invited Frodo to come over  and sit  by  him. As  Frodo drew near be
threw back his  hood, showing  a shaggy head of dark hair  necked with grey,
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.
'I  am called Strider,'  he said  in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'
'He  did,' said  Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under  the
stare of those keen eyes.
'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider,  'if I were  you, I should stop
,
your  young friends  from talking too much. Drink fire,  and chance-meeting
are pleasant enough, but, well - this  isn't the Shire. There are queer folk
about. Though I  say it as shouldn't, you may  think,'  he  added with a wry
