Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather-beaten man,
sitting in  the  shadows near the  wall, was  also listening intently to the
hobbit-talk. He had  a  tall tankard  in  front of him, and  was  smoking  a
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs  were stretched out before him,
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-
green
cloth was  drawn  close  about him, and in spite of the heat of the room  he
wore a hood  that overshadowed his  face; but the gleam of his eyes could be
seen as he watched the hobbits.
'Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he  got  a chance  to  whisper  to Mr.
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?'
'Him?' said  the  landlord in  an  answering whisper,  cocking  an  eye
without  turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he
pops  up again. He was in and out  pretty  often last spring; but I  haven't
seen  him about lately. What his  right name is I've  never  heard: but he's
known round here as Strider. Goes  about at a great pace on his long shanks;
though  he  don't  tell nobody what cause  he has to hurry.  But there's  no
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you  should  ask about  him.' But  at
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away  by a demand for more ale  and his
last remark remained unexplained.
Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he  had heard or
guessed  all that had been said.  Presently,  with a wave of his hand and  a
nod, he invited Frodo to come over  and sit  by  him. As  Frodo drew near be
threw back his  hood, showing  a shaggy head of dark hair  necked with grey,
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.
'I  am called Strider,'  he said  in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'
'He  did,' said  Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under  the
stare of those keen eyes.
'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider,  'if I were  you, I should stop
,
your  young friends  from talking too much. Drink fire,  and chance-meeting
are pleasant enough, but, well - this  isn't the Shire. There are queer folk
about. Though I  say it as shouldn't, you may  think,'  he  added with a wry
smile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And  there have been even stranger travellers
through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face.
Frodo returned his  gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no  further
sign.  His  attention  seemed  suddenly to be fixed on Pippin.  To his alarm
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success
with  the fat  Mayor of  Michel  Delving, was  now actually  giving a  comic
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance.
Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most  of the local
hobbits, no doubt: just a  funny story about  those funny people away beyond
the River;  but some (old Butterbur, for instance)  knew a thing or two, and
had probably heard rumours long ago about  Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring
the name of Baggins to their minds,  especially  if there had been inquiries
in Bree after that name.
Frodo  fidgeted,  wondering  what to  do.  Pippin  was  evidently  much
enjoying  the attention he was getting,  and had  become  quite forgetful of
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even
mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.
'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear.
Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to  talk. The attention
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the  hobbits looked at Frodo and
laughed and clapped, thinking that  Mr. Underhill  had taken as  much ale as
was good for him.
Frodo  suddenly felt very foolish,  and found himself (as was his habit
when making a speech) fingering  the things in his pocket. He felt the  Ring
on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on
and vanish out of the silly  situation. It seemed to him,  somehow, as if me
suggestion came to him from outside,  from someone or  something a the room.
He resisted the  temptation firmly, and clasped  the Ring in his hand, as if
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing                any   mischief.  At
any rate it  gave him no inspiration. He spoke  'a  few suitable  words', as
they  would have said  in the  Shire:          We  are all very much gratified by the
kindness of your reception, and  I  venture to hope that my brief visit will
help to  renew  the old ties of  friendship between the Shire and Bree;                    and
then he hesitated and coughed.
Everyone in the room was now  looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one  of
the hobbits. 'A song! A song!' shouted all the others. 'Come on now, master,
sing us something that we haven't heard before!'
For  a  moment  Frodo  stood gaping. Then  in  desperation he  began  a
ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather  fond of (and indeed rather proud
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that  is
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a
few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered.
There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,
And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his fill.
The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a five-stringed fiddle;
And up and down he runs his bow,
Now squeaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle.
The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;
When there's good cheer among the guests,
He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.
They also keep a horned cow
as proud as any queen;
But music turns her head like ale,
And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green.
And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons!
For Sunday* there's a special pair,
And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons.
The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
