sing us something that we haven't heard before!'
For  a  moment  Frodo  stood gaping. Then  in  desperation he  began  a
ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather  fond of (and indeed rather proud
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that  is
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a
few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered.
There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,
And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his fill.
The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a five-stringed fiddle;
And up and down he runs his bow,
Now squeaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle.
The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;
When there's good cheer among the guests,
He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.
They also keep a horned cow
as proud as any queen;
But music turns her head like ale,
And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green.
And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons!
For Sunday* there's a special pair,
And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons.
The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
and the cat began to wail;
A dish and a spoon on the table danced,
The cow in the garden madly pranced,
and the little dog chased his tail.
The Man in the Moon took another mug,
and then rolled beneath his chair;
And there he dozed and dreamed of ale,
Till in the sky the stars were pale,
and dawn was in the air.
Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat:
'The white horses of the Moon,
They neigh and champ their silver bits;
But their master's been and drowned his wits,
and the Sun'll be rising soon!'
So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would wake the dead:
He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune,
While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
'It's after three!' he said.
They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon,
While his horses galloped up in rear,
And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon.
Now quicker the fiddle went deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar,
The cow and the horses stood on their heads;
The guests all bounded from their beds
and danced upon the floor.
With a ping and a pong the fiddle-strings broke!
the cow jumped over the Moon,
And the little dog laughed to see such fun,
And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon.
The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.
She* hardly believed her fiery eyes;
For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed!
There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a  good voice, and the song
tickled their fancy.  'Where's old Barley?' they  cried. 'He ought  to  hear
this. Bob  ought to learn his cat  the fiddle, and then we'd have a  dance.'
They called for more ale, and  began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master!
Come on now! Once more!'
They made  Frodo have another drink,  and then  begin his  song  again,
while many of them  joined  in; for the tune was  well known, and  they were
quick at picking up  words.  It  was now Frodo's turn to feel  pleased  with
himself. He capered  about on the table; and when he came  a second  time to
the cow jumped over the Moon,            he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for
he came down,  bang, into a  tray full of mugs, and slipped, and  rolled off
the table with  a crash, clatter, and bump!  The audience  all opened  their
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer
disappeared. He simply  vanished, as  if he had  gone slap through the floor
without leaving a hole!
The  local hobbits  stared in  amazement, and then sprang to their feet
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam,
who
found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and  doubtfully from
a  distance.  It was  plain  that many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But
there
was one  swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with  a knowing  and
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had
been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the  evening.  Harry  the
gatekeeper also went out just behind them..
Frodo felt  a fool. Not knowing what else  to do, he crawled away under
