And the little dog laughed to see such fun,
And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon.
The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.
She* hardly believed her fiery eyes;
For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed!
There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a  good voice, and the song
tickled their fancy.  'Where's old Barley?' they  cried. 'He ought  to  hear
this. Bob  ought to learn his cat  the fiddle, and then we'd have a  dance.'
They called for more ale, and  began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master!
Come on now! Once more!'
They made  Frodo have another drink,  and then  begin his  song  again,
while many of them  joined  in; for the tune was  well known, and  they were
quick at picking up  words.  It  was now Frodo's turn to feel  pleased  with
himself. He capered  about on the table; and when he came  a second  time to
the cow jumped over the Moon,            he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for
he came down,  bang, into a  tray full of mugs, and slipped, and  rolled off
the table with  a crash, clatter, and bump!  The audience  all opened  their
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer
disappeared. He simply  vanished, as  if he had  gone slap through the floor
without leaving a hole!
The  local hobbits  stared in  amazement, and then sprang to their feet
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam,
who
found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and  doubtfully from
a  distance.  It was  plain  that many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But
there
was one  swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with  a knowing  and
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had
been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the  evening.  Harry  the
gatekeeper also went out just behind them..
Frodo felt  a fool. Not knowing what else  to do, he crawled away under
the tables to the  dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back  against the wall and took off the Ring. How
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he
had  been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and  that somehow  it had
slipped on  when he stuck out  his hand with a jerk to save his  fall. For a
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.
'Well?' said Strider, when he reappeared.  'Why did you do that?  Worse
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or
should I say your finger?'
'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed.
'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but  we had better wait  until the
uproar has  died down. Then, if you  please, Mr.               Baggins, I    should  like  a
quiet word with you.'
'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name.
'A matter of  some importance -  to us both,' answered Strider, looking
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.'
'Very  well,' said Frodo,  trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk  to
you later.'
Meanwhile an argument was going on by the  fireplace. Mr. Butterbur had
come trotting  in, and  he was now  trying  to listen to several conflicting
accounts of the event at the same time.
'I saw him, Mr.  Butterbur,' said a hobbit;  'or leastways I didn't see
him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished  into thin air, in a manner of
speaking.'
'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled.
'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.'
'There's some  mistake  somewhere,' said  Butterbur,  shaking his head.
There was too much of  that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing  into thin air; or
into thick air, as is more likely in this room.'
'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.
'How should I  know?  He's welcome to go  where he will, so long as  he
pays in the morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.'
'Well,  I  saw what I  saw,  and  I saw what I  didn't,'  said  Mugwort
obstinately.
'And I say there's  some mistake,' repeated  Butterbur,  picking up the
tray and gathering up the broken crockery.
'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here  I
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.'
He  came forward into  the  firelight;  but most of the company  backed
,
away, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly  under the  tables after
he  had fallen. Most of the  Hobbits  and the Men of Bree went off then  and
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.
The
Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.
Mr. Butterbur did  not seem  much put out. He reckoned,  very probably,
that his house would be full again on many future  nights, until the present
mystery had been  thoroughly discussed. 'Now what have  you been doing,  Mr.
Underhill?'  he asked.  'Frightening  my customers and breaking up my crocks
with your acrobatics!'
'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was quite
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.'
'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling,
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand - and warn
me.   We're a bit suspicious round here of anything  out of  the way -uncanny,
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.'
'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise
you.  And now  I think I'll be getting  to bed. We shall be  making an early
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o'clock?'
'Very  good! But  before  you go, I  should like  a  word  with you  in
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought
to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.'
'Certainly!'  said Frodo; but his  heart  sank.  He wondered  how  many
private talks  he would have before  he  got to  bed,  and  what  they would
reveal. Were  these people  all in league against him?  He  began to suspect
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs               .
