tray and gathering up the broken crockery.
'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here  I
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.'
He  came forward into  the  firelight;  but most of the company  backed
,
away, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly  under the  tables after
he  had fallen. Most of the  Hobbits  and the Men of Bree went off then  and
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.
The
Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.
Mr. Butterbur did  not seem  much put out. He reckoned,  very probably,
that his house would be full again on many future  nights, until the present
mystery had been  thoroughly discussed. 'Now what have  you been doing,  Mr.
Underhill?'  he asked.  'Frightening  my customers and breaking up my crocks
with your acrobatics!'
'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was quite
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.'
'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling,
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand - and warn
me.   We're a bit suspicious round here of anything  out of  the way -uncanny,
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.'
'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise
you.  And now  I think I'll be getting  to bed. We shall be  making an early
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o'clock?'
'Very  good! But  before  you go, I  should like  a  word  with you  in
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought
to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.'
'Certainly!'  said Frodo; but his  heart  sank.  He wondered  how  many
private talks  he would have before  he  got to  bed,  and  what  they would
reveal. Were  these people  all in league against him?  He  began to suspect
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs               .
Chapter 10. Strider
Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no
light. Merry was not there, and the  fire had burned low.  It  was not until
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting
in a chair by the door!
'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?'
'I  am called Strider,' he answered: 'and  though he may have forgotten
it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.'
'You  said  I  might  hear something to my advantage, I  believe,' said
Frodo. 'What have you to say?'
'Several things,' answered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.'
'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply.
'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you  what I  know, and
give you some good advice - but I shall want a reward.'
'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he had
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably  that  he had  brought
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he
could not spare any of it.
'No more than  you can afford,' answered  Strider with a slow smile, as
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you,
until I wish to leave you.'
'Oh, indeed!' replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. 'Even if
I wanted another  companion, I should  not  agree to any such thing, until I
knew a good deal more about you, and your business.'
'Excellent!' exclaimed  Strider,  crossing  his legs  and sitting  back
comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you
what I know, and leave the reward to  you. You may be glad to grant it, when
you have heard me.'
'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?'
'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your
business --' He got  up and went to the door,  opened it quickly  and looked
out.  Then  he shut it quietly and  sat  down again. 'I have quick ears,' he
went  on, lowering his voice, 'and  though I cannot disappear, I have hunted
many  wild  and wary  things and I can usually avoid being  seen, if I wish.
Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four
hobbits  came out  of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to
old  Bombadil  or  to  one  another, but  one  thing interested  me.                 Please
remember,      said one of them,      that the name Baggins  must not be mentioned. I
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.                That interested me so much that
I followed them here.  I slipped  over the gate just behind them.  Maybe Mr.
Baggins  has  an  honest reason  for  leaving his name  behind; but if so, I
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.'
'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' said Frodo
angrily,  'and I have still to  learn why  it interests you. Mr. Strider may
have an honest reason  for spying  and eavesdropping;  but  if so,  I should
advise him to explain it.'
'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple:
I was looking for  a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted  to find him
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret
that concerned me and my friends.
'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam
jumped up  with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of  the secret than you do.
And care  is  needed!' He leaned forward  and  looked at them. 'Watch  every
shadow!' he said in a  low  voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree.
On  Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared
later,
coming up the Greenway from the south.'
There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to
have guessed  it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said. 'And  the
landlord  seems  to  have heard something. Why did  he press us to join  the
company?  And  why  on  earth  did we  behave so foolishly: we ought to have
stayed quiet in here.'
'It would  have been better,' said Strider. 'I would  have stopped your
going into  the  common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me
in to see you, or take a message.'
'Do you think he------' began Frodo.
'No,  I  don't  think any  harm  of old Butterbur.  Only  he  does  not
altogether like  mysterious vagabonds  of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a
curl of his lip and a  queer gleam in  his eye. 'But I  hope we shall get to
