many  wild  and wary  things and I can usually avoid being  seen, if I wish.
Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four
hobbits  came out  of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to
old  Bombadil  or  to  one  another, but  one  thing interested  me.                 Please
remember,      said one of them,      that the name Baggins  must not be mentioned. I
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.                That interested me so much that
I followed them here.  I slipped  over the gate just behind them.  Maybe Mr.
Baggins  has  an  honest reason  for  leaving his name  behind; but if so, I
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.'
'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' said Frodo
angrily,  'and I have still to  learn why  it interests you. Mr. Strider may
have an honest reason  for spying  and eavesdropping;  but  if so,  I should
advise him to explain it.'
'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple:
I was looking for  a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted  to find him
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret
that concerned me and my friends.
'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam
jumped up  with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of  the secret than you do.
And care  is  needed!' He leaned forward  and  looked at them. 'Watch  every
shadow!' he said in a  low  voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree.
On  Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared
later,
coming up the Greenway from the south.'
There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to
have guessed  it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said. 'And  the
landlord  seems  to  have heard something. Why did  he press us to join  the
company?  And  why  on  earth  did we  behave so foolishly: we ought to have
stayed quiet in here.'
'It would  have been better,' said Strider. 'I would  have stopped your
going into  the  common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me
in to see you, or take a message.'
'Do you think he------' began Frodo.
'No,  I  don't  think any  harm  of old Butterbur.  Only  he  does  not
altogether like  mysterious vagabonds  of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a
curl of his lip and a  queer gleam in  his eye. 'But I  hope we shall get to
know one another better.  When we do, I hope you will explain  what happened
at the end of your song. For that little prank------'
'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo.
'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That  accident has made your
position dangerous.'
'Hardly more than it  was already,' said Frodo.  'I knew these horsemen
were pursuing me;  but now  at any rate they seem to  have  missed me and to
have gone away.'
'You  must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return.
And more  are  coming. There are others. I know their  number. I know  these
Riders.' He paused,  and his  eyes were cold and hard. 'And there  are  some
folk  in Bree who  are  not to be  trusted,'  he went on.  'Bill  Ferny, for
instance. He  has an evil name in the Bree-land,  and queer folk call at his
house.  You  must  have  noticed him among the  company:  a swarthy sneering
fellow.  He  was very close with  one  of  the Southern  strangers, and they
slipped  out   together  just  after  your  "accident".  Not  all  of  those
Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything  to anybody;
or make mischief for amusement.'
'What  will Ferny sell,  and what has my accident got to do  with him?'
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.
'News  of you,  of  course,'  answered  Strider.  'An  account of  your
performance would  be very interesting to certain  people.  After that  they
would hardly  need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely
that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is that enough? You can
do as you like  about my  reward: take me as a guide  or  not. But I may say
that I know all the lands  between the Shire and  the Misty Mountains, for I
have  wandered over  them for many years. I  am  older than  I look. I might
prove useful. You will  have to leave the  open  road after tonight; for the
horsemen will  watch  it  night and  day. You may  escape from  Bree, and be
allowed to  go forward while the Sun is up;  but you won't go far. They will
come on you in the wild, in some dark  place where  there is no help. Do you
wish them to find you? They are terrible!'
The  hobbits looked at him,  and  saw  with surprise that  his face was
drawn  as if with pain, and  his hands clenched the arms of  his  chair. The
room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening
to sounds in the Night far away.
'There!' he  cried  after  a moment, drawing his hand  across his brow.
'Perhaps I know  more about these pursuers than you  do.  You fear them, but
you do not fear them enough,  yet. Tomorrow you will  have to escape, if you
can. Strider can take  you by paths that  are  seldom trodden. Will you have
him?'
There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was  confused
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned,  and looked at his  master; and at last he
broke out:
'With  your leave,  Mr. Frodo, I'd  say no! This Strider here, he warns
and he says take care; and  I        say  yes   to that, and let's begin with him. He
comes out  of  the Wild, and I  never heard no good  of such  folk. He knows
something, that's  plain,  and more  than  I like; but it's no reason why we
should let him go leading us out into  some dark place  far from help, as he
puts it.'
Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes  on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as
you  choose to  look. You began  to talk to me like the Bree-folk,  but your
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?
Who are  you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how
do
you know it?'
'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get
to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You  must
make up your  mind. I will answer some of your  questions, if that will help
you to do so.  But  why should you believe  my story, if you do not trust me
already? Still here it is------'
At that  moment  there  came a  knock at the  door.  Mr. Butterbur  had
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider
withdrew into a dark corner.
'I've come  to bid  you  good night,' said  the  landlord,  putting the
candles on the table. 'Nob!  Take  the  water to the rooms!' He came in  and
shut the door.
'It's like  this,' he began,  hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've
done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll
