suspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but
you
have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.'
'No, but I had to  badger  you,'  said Gandalf. 'I wanted the truth. It
was  important. Magic  rings  are  - well, magical; and  they are  rare  and
curious. I was  professionally interested in  your ring, you may say;  and I
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also
I  think  you    have had  it quite long  enough. You won't need it  any  more.
Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.'
Bilbo  flushed, and there  was an angry light in  his eyes.  His kindly
face  grew hard. 'Why  not?'  he  cried. 'And what business is it of  yours,
anyway, to know what I  do with my own things? It is my own. I found  it. It
came to me.'
'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.'
'If I am  it  is your  fault,' said Bilbo. 'It is mine, I  tell you. My
own. My precious. Yes, my precious.'
The wizard's face remained grave and attentive,  and  only a flicker in
his deep eyes showed that he  was startled and indeed  alarmed. 'It has been
called that before,' he said, 'but not by you.'
'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It's
not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.'
Gandalf stood  up. He  spoke  sternly. 'You will be  a fool if  you do.
Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has  got
far  too much  hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and  be
free.'
'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately.
'Now, now, my dear hobbit!  ' said Gandalf. 'All your long life we have
been  friends, and you owe me something. Come!  Do as you promised: give  it
up! '
'Well,  if  you  want my ring yourself, say  so!' cried Bilbo. 'But you
won't get it.  I won't give my precious away, I tell  you.' His hand strayed
to the hilt of his small sword.
Gandalf's eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said.
If  you  say  that again,  I shall.  Then  you  will  see Gandalf  the  Grey
uncloaked.'  He took a step towards the hobbit,  and he seemed to  grow tall
and menacing; his shadow filled the little room.
Bilbo backed away  to the  wall, breathing hard, his hand  clutching at
his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another,  and the  air of  the
room tingled. Gandalf's  eyes remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly  his hands
relaxed, and he began to tremble.
'I  don't know  what has  come  over  you, Gandalf,' he said. 'You have
never been like this  before. What is it all  about? It is mine isn't it?  I
found it, and Gollum would  have killed  me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not  a
thief, whatever he said.'
'I have  never called  you  one,' Gandalf answered. 'And  I  am not one
either. I am not trying to rob you,  but to help you. I wish you would trust
me,  as  you  used.' He turned  away, and the  shadow  passed. He  seemed to
dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled.
Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry,' he said. 'But I felt so
queer.  And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any
more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was
like an eye  looking at me.  And  I  am  always  wanting  to put it  on  and
disappear, don't you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to
make sure. I tried locking it up, but  I found I couldn't rest without it in
my pocket. I don't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind.'
'Then  trust mine,'  said Gandalf. 'It is quite  made  up.  Go away and
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after
him.'
Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. 'All
right,' he said with an effort. I will.' Then he shrugged his shoulders, and
smiled rather ruefully. 'After  all that's what this party business  was all
about, really: to  give away lots of birthday presents,  and somehow make it
easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn't made it any easier in the
end, but it would be  a pity  to waste  all my  preparations. It would quite
spoil the joke.'
'Indeed  it would take  away the only point I ever saw in the  affair,'
said Gandalf.
'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo  with all the rest.' He drew
a  deep breath. 'And  now I  really must be starting, or somebody else  will
catch  me.  I  have  said good-bye, and I couldn't bear  to  do it  all over
again.' He picked up his bag and moved to the door.
'You  have  still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard. 'Well,
so I have!' cried Bilbo. 'And my will and  all  the other documents too. You
had better take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.'
'No,  don't give  the  ring  to  me,'  said  Gandalf. 'Put  it  on  the
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough  there, till Frodo comes.  I  shall wait
for him.'
Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as  he was about to set it by the
clock, his hand jerked back, and the  packet fell  on  the floor.  Before he
could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and  set it in its place.
A spasm  of anger passed swiftly over  the hobbit's  face again. Suddenly it
gave way to a look of relief and a laugh. 'Well, that's that,' he said. 'Now
I'm off!'
They went out into the hall.  Bilbo chose  his favourite stick from the
stand; then he  whistled.  Three  dwarves came out of  different rooms where
they had been busy.
'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and labelled?'
'Everything,' they answered.
'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door.
It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked
up,  sniffing  the air. 'What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the Road
with dwarves!  This  is  what  I  have  really  been longing for, for years!
Good-bye!  ' he said, looking  at  his old  home and  bowing  to  the  door.
'Good-bye, Gandalf!'
'Good-bye, for the present,  Bilbo. Take  care of yourself! You are old
enough, and perhaps wise enough.'
'Take care! I  don't care. Don't  you worry about me! I am as happy now
as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come.
I am being swept off my feet at last,' he added, and then in a low voice, as
if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with eager feet,
Until it joins some larger way
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
He  paused, silent for a moment.  Then without another  word he  turned
away from the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his
three  companions  went round  into  his garden,  and trotted  down the long
