'There!' he  cried  after  a moment, drawing his hand  across his brow.
'Perhaps I know  more about these pursuers than you  do.  You fear them, but
you do not fear them enough,  yet. Tomorrow you will  have to escape, if you
can. Strider can take  you by paths that  are  seldom trodden. Will you have
him?'
There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was  confused
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned,  and looked at his  master; and at last he
broke out:
'With  your leave,  Mr. Frodo, I'd  say no! This Strider here, he warns
and he says take care; and  I        say  yes   to that, and let's begin with him. He
comes out  of  the Wild, and I  never heard no good  of such  folk. He knows
something, that's  plain,  and more  than  I like; but it's no reason why we
should let him go leading us out into  some dark place  far from help, as he
puts it.'
Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes  on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as
you  choose to  look. You began  to talk to me like the Bree-folk,  but your
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?
Who are  you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how
do
you know it?'
'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get
to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You  must
make up your  mind. I will answer some of your  questions, if that will help
you to do so.  But  why should you believe  my story, if you do not trust me
already? Still here it is------'
At that  moment  there  came a  knock at the  door.  Mr. Butterbur  had
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider
withdrew into a dark corner.
'I've come  to bid  you  good night,' said  the  landlord,  putting the
candles on the table. 'Nob!  Take  the  water to the rooms!' He came in  and
shut the door.
'It's like  this,' he began,  hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've
done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll
admit; and  I'm a busy man.  But first one thing and then another  this week
have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see,
I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of
Baggins in particular.'
'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo.
'Ah! you know best,'  said the landlord, knowingly.  'I won't give  you
away;  but  I  was  told that  this  Baggins would be going by  the  name of
Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you well enough, if I may
say so.'
'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting.
'A stout  little fellow with red cheeks,'      said  Mr. Butterbur solemnly.
Pippin chuckled,  but Sam looked indignant.               'That won't  help  you  much; it
goes for  most hobbits. Barley,         he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with
a glance at Pippin.      'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most,
and he  has a cleft in his  chin: perky chap with a bright eye.                Begging your
pardon, but he said it, not me.'
'He  said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly.
'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is,
but he's a  good  friend of mine, whether or no. But now  I  don't know what
he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into
a block of  wood, I  shouldn't wonder. He's  a  bit hasty. Still what's done
can't be undone. '
'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow
unravelling of Butterbur's thoughts.
'Where was I?' said the landlord,  pausing  and  snapping  his fingers.
'Ah,  yes!  Old Gandalf. Three  months  back he walked  right  into  my room
without  a  knock.      Barley,   he says,   I'm off in  the  morning.  Will  you  do
something for me? You've  only to name it,              I said.  I'm in a hurry,     said he,
and  I've no time myself, but I want  a message took to the Shire. Have  you
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone,                   I  said,  tomorrow,
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow,               he says, and then he gave  me  a
letter.
'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr.  Butterbur,  producing a letter
from his pocket,  and reading out the  address slowly and proudly (he valued
his reputation as a lettered man):
Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE.
'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo.
'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?'
'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that  letter  at once,
and explain  why  you  never sent it.  That's  what you came  to tell  me, I
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.'
Poor Mr. Butterbur looked  troubled.  'You're right, master,' he  said,
'and I beg  your pardon. And I'm mortal  afraid of what Gandalf will say, if
harm comes  of it. But I didn't  keep  it back a-purpose. I put  it by safe.
Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day
after, and  none of  my own folk were to spare;  and  then  one  thing after
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a  busy man. I'll do what I can to  set
matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it.
'Leaving the letter aside, I  promised Gandalf no less.             Barley,   he says
to  me,   this friend of mine from the Shire, he may  be coming out  this  way
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that!
But  you need  ask  no  questions.  And if I'm  not with him, he  may  be in
trouble, and  he  may need  help. Do whatever you can for him,  and I'll  be
grateful,   he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.'
'What do you mean?' asked Frodo.
'These  black  men,' said  the landlord lowering  his  voice.  'They're
looking  for     Baggins,    and if they mean well, then  I'm a hobbit. It was  on
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny,
I
called  it. Nob, he came and told me that two  black  men were  at  the door
asking  for a  hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid
the  black  fellows be off, and  slammed the door on them; but they've  been
asking the same  question all the  way to  Archet, I hear. And that  Ranger,
Strider, he's been asking  questions, too. Tried to get in here  to see you,
before you'd had bite or sup, he did.'
'He did!' said Strider suddenly, coming  forward into  the light.  'And
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.'
The landlord  jumped with surprise.  'You!'  he  cried.  'You're always
popping up. What do you want now?'
'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo. 'He came to offer me his help.'
'Well, you  know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking
suspiciously  at Strider. 'But if I  was in your plight,  I wouldn't take up
with a Ranger.'
'Then who would  you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who
