'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?'
'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that  letter  at once,
and explain  why  you  never sent it.  That's  what you came  to tell  me, I
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.'
Poor Mr. Butterbur looked  troubled.  'You're right, master,' he  said,
'and I beg  your pardon. And I'm mortal  afraid of what Gandalf will say, if
harm comes  of it. But I didn't  keep  it back a-purpose. I put  it by safe.
Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day
after, and  none of  my own folk were to spare;  and  then  one  thing after
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a  busy man. I'll do what I can to  set
matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it.
'Leaving the letter aside, I  promised Gandalf no less.             Barley,   he says
to  me,   this friend of mine from the Shire, he may  be coming out  this  way
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that!
But  you need  ask  no  questions.  And if I'm  not with him, he  may  be in
trouble, and  he  may need  help. Do whatever you can for him,  and I'll  be
grateful,   he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.'
'What do you mean?' asked Frodo.
'These  black  men,' said  the landlord lowering  his  voice.  'They're
looking  for     Baggins,    and if they mean well, then  I'm a hobbit. It was  on
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny,
I
called  it. Nob, he came and told me that two  black  men were  at  the door
asking  for a  hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid
the  black  fellows be off, and  slammed the door on them; but they've  been
asking the same  question all the  way to  Archet, I hear. And that  Ranger,
Strider, he's been asking  questions, too. Tried to get in here  to see you,
before you'd had bite or sup, he did.'
'He did!' said Strider suddenly, coming  forward into  the light.  'And
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.'
The landlord  jumped with surprise.  'You!'  he  cried.  'You're always
popping up. What do you want now?'
'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo. 'He came to offer me his help.'
'Well, you  know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking
suspiciously  at Strider. 'But if I  was in your plight,  I wouldn't take up
with a Ranger.'
'Then who would  you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who
only remembers his own name  because people  shout  it at him  all day? They
cannot stay in     The  Pony     for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long
road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?'
'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur,
looking  really scared. 'But why can't you stay here  quiet for  a  bit, Mr.
Underhill?  What are  all  these  queer goings on? What are these black  men
after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?'
'I'm sorry I  can't explain it all,' answered  Frodo.  'I  am tired and
very worried, and it's a long tale. But  if you mean to help me, I  ought to
warn you  that you will be in  danger  as long as I  am in your house. These
Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from------'
'They  come from Mordor,'  said  Strider in a low  voice. 'From Mordor,
Barliman, if that means anything to you.'
'Save us!' cried  Mr.  Butterbur turning  pale; the  name evidently was
known to him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It
is,' said  Frodo. 'Are  you still  willing to help  me?'  'I  am,'  said Mr.
Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me  can do
against, against------' he faltered.
'Against the Shadow in the  East,' said  Strider  quietly.  'Not  much,
Barliman, but  every  little  helps. You  can let  Mr. Underhill  stay  here
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the  name of Baggins,  till he
is far away.'
'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here without
help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity  Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself
this evening, to  say no more. The story of that  Mr. Bilbo's  going off has
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he
is.'
'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo.
'I hope  not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks  or no spooks,  they
won't get in    The Pony     so easy.  Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say
no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while  I can stand on my legs. Me
and my folk'll keep watch  tonight; but you had best get some  sleep, if you
can.'
'In any case we  must be called at  dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.'
'Right!  I'll see to the orders,'  said the landlord. 'Good night,  Mr.
Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night -  now, bless me! Where's your
Mr. Brandybuck?'
'I don't know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had  forgotten all
about  Merry, and it was  getting late.  'I  am afraid  he is  out. He  said
something about going for a breath of air.'
'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see
your friend is let  in when  he comes.  I'd better send Nob to look for him.
Good  night  to  you all!'  At  last  Mr. Butterbur  went out,  with another
doubtful look at Strider and  a  shake of his  head. His footsteps retreated
down the passage.
'Well?' said Strider. 'When are  you  going to open that letter?' Frodo
looked carefully at  the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly  to be
Gandalf's. Inside, written in the  wizard's strong but  graceful script, was
the following message:
THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418.
Dear Frodo,
Bad news has reached me here.  I must go  off at  once. You  had better
leave  Bag End  soon, and get out of the  Shire before  the  end  of July at
latest. I will return as soon  as I can; and I will follow  you,  if  I find
that you are gone. Leave a  message for me here,  if you  pass through Bree.
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business
and will help you. Make for  Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I
do not come, Elrond will advise you.
Yours in haste
GANDALF.
PS. Do NOT use It  again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by
night!
PPS. Make  sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a fire shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
