Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night -  now, bless me! Where's your
Mr. Brandybuck?'
'I don't know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had  forgotten all
about  Merry, and it was  getting late.  'I  am afraid  he is  out. He  said
something about going for a breath of air.'
'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see
your friend is let  in when  he comes.  I'd better send Nob to look for him.
Good  night  to  you all!'  At  last  Mr. Butterbur  went out,  with another
doubtful look at Strider and  a  shake of his  head. His footsteps retreated
down the passage.
'Well?' said Strider. 'When are  you  going to open that letter?' Frodo
looked carefully at  the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly  to be
Gandalf's. Inside, written in the  wizard's strong but  graceful script, was
the following message:
THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418.
Dear Frodo,
Bad news has reached me here.  I must go  off at  once. You  had better
leave  Bag End  soon, and get out of the  Shire before  the  end  of July at
latest. I will return as soon  as I can; and I will follow  you,  if  I find
that you are gone. Leave a  message for me here,  if you  pass through Bree.
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business
and will help you. Make for  Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I
do not come, Elrond will advise you.
Yours in haste
GANDALF.
PS. Do NOT use It  again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by
night!
PPS. Make  sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a fire shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king.
PPPS.  I hope  Butterbur  sends  this promptly.  A  worthy man, but his
memory is  like a lumber-roam: thing wanted always buried. If he  forgets, I
shall roast him.
Fare Well!
Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam.
'Really  old Butterbur has  made  a mess of things!' he  said. 'He  deserves
roasting. If  I  had  got this  at  once,  we  might all have  been safe  in
Rivendell  by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he
was going into great danger.'
'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider.
Frodo  turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf's
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf's friend at
once?' he asked. 'It would have saved time.'
'Would it? Would any of  you have believed me till now?' said  Strider.
'I knew nothing  of this letter.  For  all I knew I  had  to persuade you to
trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend
to tell you  all about myself at once. I had  to study            you    first,  and make
sure of  you. The  Enemy has set traps for  me before  now. As soon as I had
made up my  mind, I was  ready to tell you  whatever  you asked.  But I must
admit,' he added with a queer laugh,  'that I hoped you would take to me for
my  own  sake. A  hunted  man sometimes  wearies  of distrust  and longs for
friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.'
'They  are - at first sight at any rate,'  laughed  Pippin with  sudden
relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as
we  say in the Shire; and  I daresay  we  shall all look much the same after
lying for days in hedges and ditches.'
'It  would  take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering
in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would  die
first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.'
Pippin  subsided; but  Sam was not  daunted, and he  still eyed Strider
dubiously. 'How do we know you are the  Strider that  Gandalf speaks about?'
he  demanded. 'You  never  mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You
might be  a  play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with
you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have
you to say to that?'
'That you are a stout fellow,' answered  Strider;  'but I am  afraid my
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I
could kill you. And I  should have killed you already without  so much talk.
If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!'
He stood up,  and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the
hilt of a sword that had  hung concealed by  his  side. They did not dare to
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly.
'But I  am  the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and
if by life or death I can save you, I will.'
There  was  a long silence.  At last Frodo  spoke  with  hesitation. 'I
believed  that you were  a friend before the letter came,' he  said,  'or at
least I wished to.  You  have frightened me several times tonight, but never
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.'
'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I  look foul and feel fair. Is that  it?        All
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are los.'
t
'Did the  verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out
what they were  about.  But how did  you  know that they  were  in Gandalf's
letter, if you have never seen it?'
'I did not  know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and  those verses go
with  that  name.' He  drew out his sword,  and they saw that  the blade was
indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the hilt. 'Not much  use is  it, Sam?'  said
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.'
Sam said nothing.
'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled.
Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we
are allowed  to  leave  Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave  it
unnoticed. But  I shall try to get  lost as soon as possible.  I know one or
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.'
'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?'
'It is a hill,  just to the north of the Road, about half way from here
to Rivendell.  It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have  a
