you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have
you to say to that?'
'That you are a stout fellow,' answered  Strider;  'but I am  afraid my
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I
could kill you. And I  should have killed you already without  so much talk.
If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!'
He stood up,  and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the
hilt of a sword that had  hung concealed by  his  side. They did not dare to
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly.
'But I  am  the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and
if by life or death I can save you, I will.'
There  was  a long silence.  At last Frodo  spoke  with  hesitation. 'I
believed  that you were  a friend before the letter came,' he  said,  'or at
least I wished to.  You  have frightened me several times tonight, but never
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.'
'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I  look foul and feel fair. Is that  it?        All
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are los.'
t
'Did the  verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out
what they were  about.  But how did  you  know that they  were  in Gandalf's
letter, if you have never seen it?'
'I did not  know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and  those verses go
with  that  name.' He  drew out his sword,  and they saw that  the blade was
indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the hilt. 'Not much  use is  it, Sam?'  said
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.'
Sam said nothing.
'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled.
Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we
are allowed  to  leave  Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave  it
unnoticed. But  I shall try to get  lost as soon as possible.  I know one or
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.'
'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?'
'It is a hill,  just to the north of the Road, about half way from here
to Rivendell.  It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have  a
chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us.
After Weathertop our  journey will become more difficult, and  we shall have
to choose between various dangers.'
'When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is,
or what he is doing?'
Strider looked  grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came  west with him
in the spring.  I have often kept watch  on  the borders of the Shire in the
last few years,  when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We
last met on the first  of May: at  Sam  Ford down the Brandywine. He told me
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for
Rivendell in the last week  of September. As I knew  he  was at your side, I
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill;  for plainly some
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help.
'I am troubled, for the  first time  since I have known  him. We should
have had messages, even if he  could not come himself. When I returned, many
days  ago, I heard the ill  news.  The tidings had gone  far  and wide  that
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of
Gildor that told me this;  and  later  they told me that you had  left  your
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I  have  been watching
the East Road anxiously.'
'Do  you  think  the Black Riders  have  anything to do  with it - with
Gandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo.
'I  do  not know of anything else  that could have hindered him, except
the  Enemy himself,'  said  Strider. 'But do not give  up  hope! Gandalf  is
greater than you Shire-folk know -  as a rule you can only see his jokes and
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.'
Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of
all  the danger and worry  I must go to  bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is
that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in
the dark to look for him.'
At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the
passage. Merry came  in  with a  rush followed  by  Nob.  He shut  the  door
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They  stared at him in
alarm for  a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen  them, Frodo! I have seen
them! Black Riders!'
'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?'
'Here. In the village. I  stayed indoors for  an  hour. Then as you did
not  come  back, I  went out  for a  stroll.  I  had come back again and was
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son
of deeper shade among the shadows across the  road, just beyond the edge  of
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was
no horse.'
'Which  way  did  it  go?'  asked Strider, suddenly  and sharply. Merry
started, noticing the  stranger for the  first  time. 'Go  on!' said  Frodo.
'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.'
'It seemed to make  off  up  the  Road,  eastward,' continued Merry. 'I
tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.'
Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said;
'but it was foolish.'
'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I  think. I could
hardly  help myself.  I  seemed to be drawn  somehow.  Anyway,  I  went, and
suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the  other  was
whispering,  or  hissing. I  couldn't hear a word  that was said. I did  not
creep  any  closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all over. Then  I  felt
terrified,  and I  turned  back,  and was  just  going  to  bolt  home, when
something came behind me and I... I fell over.'
'I  found  him,  sir,'  put in Nob.  'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with  a
lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just
nigh  Bill Ferny's  house I thought  I could see  something in  the  Road. I
couldn't swear to  it, but it  looked to me as if two men was  stooping over
something, lilting  it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there
was  no  signs  of them,  and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by  the roadside. He
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had  fallen into  deep  water," he says to
me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he
got up and ran back here like a hare.'
'I am  afraid that's true,'  said Merry, 'though I  don't know  what  I
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't
know what came over me.'
'I  do,' said Strider.  'The Black Breath. The  Riders  must have  left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They
will know all the news now, for  they have visited  Bill Ferny; and probably
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before
