not  come  back, I  went out  for a  stroll.  I  had come back again and was
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son
of deeper shade among the shadows across the  road, just beyond the edge  of
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was
no horse.'
'Which  way  did  it  go?'  asked Strider, suddenly  and sharply. Merry
started, noticing the  stranger for the  first  time. 'Go  on!' said  Frodo.
'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.'
'It seemed to make  off  up  the  Road,  eastward,' continued Merry. 'I
tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.'
Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said;
'but it was foolish.'
'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I  think. I could
hardly  help myself.  I  seemed to be drawn  somehow.  Anyway,  I  went, and
suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the  other  was
whispering,  or  hissing. I  couldn't hear a word  that was said. I did  not
creep  any  closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all over. Then  I  felt
terrified,  and I  turned  back,  and was  just  going  to  bolt  home, when
something came behind me and I... I fell over.'
'I  found  him,  sir,'  put in Nob.  'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with  a
lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just
nigh  Bill Ferny's  house I thought  I could see  something in  the  Road. I
couldn't swear to  it, but it  looked to me as if two men was  stooping over
something, lilting  it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there
was  no  signs  of them,  and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by  the roadside. He
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had  fallen into  deep  water," he says to
me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he
got up and ran back here like a hare.'
'I am  afraid that's true,'  said Merry, 'though I  don't know  what  I
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't
know what came over me.'
'I  do,' said Strider.  'The Black Breath. The  Riders  must have  left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They
will know all the news now, for  they have visited  Bill Ferny; and probably
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before
we leave Bree.'
'What  will happen?'  said  Merry.  'Will they attack the inn?'  'No, I
think not,' said Strider.  'They are not all here yet. And in any  case that
is not their way. In dark and loneliness  they are strongest; they will  not
openly attack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they
are desperate, not while all the  long  leagues of Eriador still  lie before
us.  But their  power  is in  terror, and already some in Bree are in  their
clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of
the strangers, and, maybe,  the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when
they
left him.'
'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do?'
'Stay here, and do not  go to  your rooms! They are sure  to have found
out which those  are. The hobbit-rooms  have windows looking north and close
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door.
But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.'
While Strider was  gone, Frodo gave Merry a  rapid account of all  that
had happened since supper. Merry was  still reading and  pondering Gandalf's
letter when Strider and Nob returned.
'Well Masters,' said  Nob, 'I've ruffled up  the clothes  and  put in a
bolster down the  middle of  each bed.  And I made a  nice imitation of your
head  with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag - Underhill,  sir,' he added with  a
grin.
Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!'  he said. 'But  what will happen when
they have penetrated the disguise?'
'We shall  see,'  said  Strider.  'Let us hope  to hold the  fort  till
morning.'
'Good  night to  you,' said Nob, and went off to take  his part in  the
watch on the doors.
Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a  low
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering  out, Frodo saw that the
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred  the heavy inside shutters and drew the
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.
The  hobbits lay  down  on their blankets  with their feet  towards the
hearth; but  Strider settled himself  in the chair against  the  door.  They
talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask.
'Jumped over  the Moon!'  chuckled  Merry as he rolled himself  in  his
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see.
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.'
'I  hope so,' said Strider. Then  they all fell  silent, and one by one
the hobbits dropped off to sleep.
