talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask.
'Jumped over  the Moon!'  chuckled  Merry as he rolled himself  in  his
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see.
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.'
'I  hope so,' said Strider. Then  they all fell  silent, and one by one
the hobbits dropped off to sleep.
Chapter 11. A Knife in the Dark
As  they prepared  for sleep  in  the  inn at  Bree,  darkness  lay  on
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river-bank. The house at
Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered
out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat  in the breathless night-air.
As he  stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under the trees;  the
gate  seemed  to open  of its own  accord and close again without  a  sound.
Terror seized him. He  shrank  back,  and for a moment he stood trembling in
the hall. Then he shut and locked the door.
The night  deepened.  There  came  the  soft  sound of horses  led with
stealth  along the  lane.  Outside  the gate  they stopped, and three  black
figures entered,  like shades of night  creeping across the ground. One went
to the door, one to the corner of the house on  either side; and there  they
stood, as  still as the shadows of  stones, while night went slowly on.  The
house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly.
There was a faint stir  in the leaves, and  a cock crowed far away. The
cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark
without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed,  as  if a chill light had  been
unsheathed. There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered.
'Open, in the name of Mordor!' said a voice thin and menacing.
At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and
lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in.
At that moment, among the trees nearby,  a  horn rang out.  It rent the
night like fire on a hill-top.
AWAKE! FEAR! FIRE! FOES! AWAKE!
Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creep
from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did,
out  of the  back door, through  the garden,  and over the  fields.  When he
reached  the  nearest  house,  more  than a mile  away, he  collapsed on the
doorstep. 'No, no, no!'  he was  crying. 'No,  not me! I haven't got it!' It
was  some time  before anyone could make out what he  was babbling about.
At
last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange  invasion
from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time.
FEAR! FIRE! FOES!
The Brandybucks were blowing  the Horn-call of  Buckland,  that had not
been sounded for  a hundred years, not  since the white wolves came  in  the
Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over.
AWAKE! AWAKE!
Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black
figures fled from the house.  One  of them  let fall a  hobbit-cloak  on the
step, as he ran. In the lane the noise  of hoofs broke out, and gathering to
a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there
was the sound  of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow!
Sauron  would deal  with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they
knew now that the house  was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down
the
guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire.
In  the early night  Frodo woke from deep  sleep, suddenly, as if  some
sound or presence  had disturbed  him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert
in his  chair: his  eyes gleamed in  the light of the  fire, which had  been
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement.
Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled with
the noise  of wind and of galloping  hoofs.  The wind  seemed to be  curling
round the house and shaking it; and far off  he heard a horn blowing wildly.
He  opened his  eyes,  and  heard a  cock  crowing  lustily in the inn-yard.
Strider  had  drawn the  curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang.
The  first  grey light of day  was in the room, and  a  cold  air was coming
through the open window.
As soon  as  Strider  had roused them  all,  he led  the  way  to their
bedrooms. When they  saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice:
the windows had been forced  open and were  swinging, and  the curtains were
flapping; the beds  were tossed about,  and the bolsters  slashed and  flung
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces.
Strider  immediately  went  to fetch the landlord. Poor  Mr.  Butterbur
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he
said), but he had never heard a sound.
'Never has such  a thing happened  in my  time!' he cried,  raising his
hands in horror. 'Guests unable to sleep in  their beds,  and good  bolsters
