from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time.
FEAR! FIRE! FOES!
The Brandybucks were blowing  the Horn-call of  Buckland,  that had not
been sounded for  a hundred years, not  since the white wolves came  in  the
Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over.
AWAKE! AWAKE!
Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black
figures fled from the house.  One  of them  let fall a  hobbit-cloak  on the
step, as he ran. In the lane the noise  of hoofs broke out, and gathering to
a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there
was the sound  of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow!
Sauron  would deal  with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they
knew now that the house  was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down
the
guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire.
In  the early night  Frodo woke from deep  sleep, suddenly, as if  some
sound or presence  had disturbed  him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert
in his  chair: his  eyes gleamed in  the light of the  fire, which had  been
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement.
Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled with
the noise  of wind and of galloping  hoofs.  The wind  seemed to be  curling
round the house and shaking it; and far off  he heard a horn blowing wildly.
He  opened his  eyes,  and  heard a  cock  crowing  lustily in the inn-yard.
Strider  had  drawn the  curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang.
The  first  grey light of day  was in the room, and  a  cold  air was coming
through the open window.
As soon  as  Strider  had roused them  all,  he led  the  way  to their
bedrooms. When they  saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice:
the windows had been forced  open and were  swinging, and  the curtains were
flapping; the beds  were tossed about,  and the bolsters  slashed and  flung
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces.
Strider  immediately  went  to fetch the landlord. Poor  Mr.  Butterbur
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he
said), but he had never heard a sound.
'Never has such  a thing happened  in my  time!' he cried,  raising his
hands in horror. 'Guests unable to sleep in  their beds,  and good  bolsters
ruined and all! What are we coming to?'
'Dark times,' said  Strider. 'But for  the present you  may be left  in
peace,  when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about
breakfast: a drink  and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be  packed
in a few minutes.'
Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were  got ready, and
to fetch them a 'bite'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had
vanished!  The stable-doors had all  been opened in the night, and they were
gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place.
Frodo was  crushed by the news. How  could they hope to reach Rivendell
on foot, pursued  by  mounted enemies? They might as  well  set  out for the
Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits,  as if he  was
weighing up their strength and courage.
'Ponies would  not help  us to  escape  horsemen,'  he  said  at  last,
thoughtfully, as if he guessed  what Frodo  had in  mind. 'We should  not go
much slower on foot, not  on the roads that I mean to take.  I was  going to
walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count
on getting anything to  eat between here and Rivendell, except  what we take
with  us; and we ought to take plenty  to spare; for we  may be delayed,  or
forced  to  go round-about, far out  of  the direct way.  How much  are  you
prepared to carry on your backs?'
'As  much as we must,' said Pippin with  a sinking heart, but trying to
show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt).
'I can carry enough for two,' said Sam defiantly.
'Can't  anything be done,  Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get a
couple of  ponies in the village, or even one  just for the baggage? I don't
suppose we  could  hire  them, but we might be able to buy them,' he  added,
doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it.
'I  doubt  it,'  said   the  landlord  unhappily.  'The  two  or  three
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled  in  my yard, and they're
gone.  As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there
are very few of them in Bree, and they won't be for sale. But I'll do what I
can. I'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.'
'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you  had better do that. I am  afraid
we  shall have to try  to get  one pony at least. But so ends  all  hope  of
starting early,  and  slipping away quietly! We might as  well have  blown a
horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.'
'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a  crumb, I
hope: we  can have  breakfast while we wait - and sit down to it.  Let's get
hold of Nob!'
In the end there was more  than three hours'  delay. Bob came back with
the  report  that  no horse or pony was to be got for love  or  money in the
neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had  one that he might possibly sell.
'A poor old half-starved creature it is,'  said Bob; 'but he won't part with
it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how  you're placed, not if I knows
Bill Ferny.'
'Bill  Ferny?'  said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast
bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?'
'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home
to him, once  it got  away.  I  fancy this  is only an  afterthought of kind
Master  Ferny's: just a  way of increasing his profits  from the affair. The
chief  danger is that the poor beast is probably at  death's door. But there
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?'
Bill Ferny's price was twelve  silver pennies; and  that  was indeed at
least  three times the pony's value in those pans. It  proved to  be a bony,
underfed, and dispirited  animal; but  it did  not look like dying just yet.
Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry  another eighteen pence
as  some  compensation  for  the  lost animals. He was an  honest  man,  and
well-off as things were reckoned  in Bree;  but thirty silver pennies was  a
sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear.
As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turned
out later that only one  horse had been actually stolen. The others had been
driven off, or  had  bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different
corners  of  the  Bree-land.  Merry's  ponies  had  escaped altogether,  and
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in
search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under  the care  of Tom Bombadil for a
while, and were well-off. But when  news of the events at Bree came to Tom's
ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very
fair price. They had  to work harder in Bree, but  Bob treated them well; so
on the whole  they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But
they never came to Rivendell.
However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone
for  good, or  for bad.  And he had other troubles. For  there  was a  great
commotion as soon as  the remaining  guests were astir and heard news of the
