'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a  crumb, I
hope: we  can have  breakfast while we wait - and sit down to it.  Let's get
hold of Nob!'
In the end there was more  than three hours'  delay. Bob came back with
the  report  that  no horse or pony was to be got for love  or  money in the
neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had  one that he might possibly sell.
'A poor old half-starved creature it is,'  said Bob; 'but he won't part with
it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how  you're placed, not if I knows
Bill Ferny.'
'Bill  Ferny?'  said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast
bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?'
'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home
to him, once  it got  away.  I  fancy this  is only an  afterthought of kind
Master  Ferny's: just a  way of increasing his profits  from the affair. The
chief  danger is that the poor beast is probably at  death's door. But there
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?'
Bill Ferny's price was twelve  silver pennies; and  that  was indeed at
least  three times the pony's value in those pans. It  proved to  be a bony,
underfed, and dispirited  animal; but  it did  not look like dying just yet.
Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry  another eighteen pence
as  some  compensation  for  the  lost animals. He was an  honest  man,  and
well-off as things were reckoned  in Bree;  but thirty silver pennies was  a
sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear.
As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turned
out later that only one  horse had been actually stolen. The others had been
driven off, or  had  bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different
corners  of  the  Bree-land.  Merry's  ponies  had  escaped altogether,  and
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in
search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under  the care  of Tom Bombadil for a
while, and were well-off. But when  news of the events at Bree came to Tom's
ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very
fair price. They had  to work harder in Bree, but  Bob treated them well; so
on the whole  they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But
they never came to Rivendell.
However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone
for  good, or  for bad.  And he had other troubles. For  there  was a  great
commotion as soon as  the remaining  guests were astir and heard news of the
raid  on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed
the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one of their own number had
also  disappeared  in the  night,  none  other than Bill Ferny's squint-eyed
companion. Suspicion fell on him at once.
'If you pick up with  a  horse-thief, and  bring him to my house,' said
Butterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay  for all the damage yourselves and  not
come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But it
appeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he had
joined their party.
After  their  breakfast the  hobbits had to re-pack,  and get  together
further  supplies for  the  longer  journey  they were now expecting. It was
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By  that time the whole of
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of
the black  horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that
Strider  the Ranger  had joined the  mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as
would last for  many  uneventful years. Most of  the inhabitants of Bree and
Staddle, and many  even  from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the  road
to
see the travellers start. The other  guests in  the inn were at the doors or
hanging out of the windows.
Strider had changed his mind, and  he decided to leave Bree by the main
road. Any attempt to set  off across country at once would only make matters
worse: half the inhabitants would follow them,  to see what they were up to,
and to prevent them from trespassing.
They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with
many thanks. 'I  hope we shall  meet again some  day, when things are  merry
once more,' said Frodo. 'I  should like nothing better than  to stay in your
house in peace for a while.'
They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd.
Not  all  the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted.  But
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo;
next came  Merry  and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony,  which was
laden with as much  of their baggage as  they  had the heart to give it; but
already it looked less dejected,  as  if  it approved of the  change in  its
fortunes.  Sam  was chewing an  apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full  of
them:  a parting  present from Nob and  Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe
for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.'
The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped  out of
doors,  or  popped over walls and fences,  as they passed. But as they  drew
near to  the further gate, Frodo saw a  dark  ill-kept  house behind a thick
hedge: the  last  house  in the village.  In one of the  windows he caught a
glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once.
'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more
than half like a goblin.'
Over the hedge  another  man  was  staring boldly.  He  had heavy black
brows, and  dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in  a  sneer.  He was
smoking a  short black pipe. As they approached he took it out  of his mouth
and spat.
'Morning,  Longshanks!' he  said.  'Off  early?  Found some  friends at
last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer.  'Morning, my little friends!' he
said  to the  others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken  up  with? That's
Stick-at-naught  Strider,  that is!  Though  I've  heard other names not  so
pretty.  Watch out tonight! And you,  Sammie, don't  go ill-treating my poor
old pony! Pah!' He spat again.
Sam turned quickly. 'And you.  Ferny,' he said, 'put your ugly face out
of sight, or it will get  hurt.' With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an
apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and
curses  came from  behind  the  hedge.  'Waste  of a  good apple,'  said Sam
regretfully, and strode on.
At last  they  left  the  village  behind. The  escort of children  and
stragglers  that  had  followed  them  got  tired  and  turned  back at  the
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some  miles. It
bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet
of  Bree-hill,  and  then  it  began to run  swiftly downwards  into  wooded
country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit-holes of
Staddle on the  gentler  south-eastern  slopes of  the hill; down in  a deep
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising  smoke  that showed
where Combe lay;
Archet was hidden in the trees beyond.
After the  Road had run down some way, and  had left Bree-hill standing
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards  the
North. 'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,' said Strider.
'Not a "short cut", I hope,' said  Pippin.  'Our last short cut through
