for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.'
The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped  out of
doors,  or  popped over walls and fences,  as they passed. But as they  drew
near to  the further gate, Frodo saw a  dark  ill-kept  house behind a thick
hedge: the  last  house  in the village.  In one of the  windows he caught a
glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once.
'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more
than half like a goblin.'
Over the hedge  another  man  was  staring boldly.  He  had heavy black
brows, and  dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in  a  sneer.  He was
smoking a  short black pipe. As they approached he took it out  of his mouth
and spat.
'Morning,  Longshanks!' he  said.  'Off  early?  Found some  friends at
last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer.  'Morning, my little friends!' he
said  to the  others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken  up  with? That's
Stick-at-naught  Strider,  that is!  Though  I've  heard other names not  so
pretty.  Watch out tonight! And you,  Sammie, don't  go ill-treating my poor
old pony! Pah!' He spat again.
Sam turned quickly. 'And you.  Ferny,' he said, 'put your ugly face out
of sight, or it will get  hurt.' With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an
apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and
curses  came from  behind  the  hedge.  'Waste  of a  good apple,'  said Sam
regretfully, and strode on.
At last  they  left  the  village  behind. The  escort of children  and
stragglers  that  had  followed  them  got  tired  and  turned  back at  the
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some  miles. It
bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet
of  Bree-hill,  and  then  it  began to run  swiftly downwards  into  wooded
country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit-holes of
Staddle on the  gentler  south-eastern  slopes of  the hill; down in  a deep
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising  smoke  that showed
where Combe lay;
Archet was hidden in the trees beyond.
After the  Road had run down some way, and  had left Bree-hill standing
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards  the
North. 'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,' said Strider.
'Not a "short cut", I hope,' said  Pippin.  'Our last short cut through
woods nearly ended in disaster.'
'Ah, but you had not  got me with you then,' laughed Strider. 'My cuts,
short  or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No one
was in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley.
His  plan, as  far as  they  could understand  it without  knowing  the
country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on
the  east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands  to
Weathertop Hill. In that way they  would, if all went well,  cut off a great
loop of the Road,  which  further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater
Marshes.  But,  of  course, they  would have  to  pass  through  the marshes
themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging.
However,  in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant.  Indeed, if  it
had not been for the disturbing events  of the night before, they would have
enjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun was
shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and
full  of  colour, and  seemed  peaceful  and wholesome. Strider  guided them
confidently among the many crossing paths, although left  to themselves they
would soon have  been at  a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many
turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit.
'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,'  he
said;  'though I don't think he  will follow  us himself. He  knows the land
round here well enough, but he knows he is not a  match for me in a wood. It
is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far
away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.'
Whether because  of Strider's skill or for some other reason,  they saw
no sign and heard no  sound of any other living thing all  that day: neither
two-footed,  except  birds; nor  four-footed,  except  one  fox  and  a  few
squirrels. The next day  they began to steer a steady  course eastwards; and
still all was quiet and  peaceful. On  the third day out from Bree they came
out of  the  Chetwood. The  land  had been falling steadily, ever since they
turned aside from the  Road,  and they  now  entered a wide flat expanse  of
country, much more difficult to manage. They were  far beyond the borders of
the Bree-land,  out in the  pathless  wilderness, and  drawing  near  to the
Midge-water Marshes.
The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they
came  upon pools, and  wide  stretches of reeds  and rushes filled with  the
warbling of little hidden  birds. They  had to pick their  way  carefully to
keep  both  dry-footed and  on  their  proper  course.  At  first  they made
fan-progress,  but as  they  went on, their passage  became slower  and more
dangerous.  The marshes were bewildering and  treacherous, and there was  no
permanent trail even for Rangers  to find through their shifting  quagmires.
The  flies began  to torment them, and the air was full  of  clouds of  tiny
midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair.
'I  am being eaten alive!'  cried  Pippin. 'Midgewater!  There are more
midges than water!'
'What  do  they live  on  when  they  can't  get  hobbit?'  asked  Sam,
scratching his neck.
They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their
camping-place  was  damp, cold,  and uncomfortable;  and the  biting insects
would not let  them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the
reeds  and tussocks that from  the sound  of them were evil relatives of the
cricket.  There  were  thousands  of  them,  and  they  squeaked all  round,
neek-breek,  breek-neek,        unceasingly all the night, until the  hobbits  were
nearly frantic.
The  next day,  the fourth, was little  better, and the night almost as
comfortless. Though  the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them)  had been  left
behind, the midges still pursued them.
As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that
far away  there came  a light in the eastern sky: it  flashed and faded many
times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off.
'What is the  light?'  he said  to  Strider,  who had  risen,  and  was
standing, gazing ahead into the night.
'I do  not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make  out. It
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.'
Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure  of Strider,  standing silent
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.
They had not  gone  far  on  the  fifth day  when  they  left  the last
straggling pools and  reed-beds of the marshes  behind them. The land before
them began steadily  to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could
now  see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the  right of  the line
and  a little  separated from the  others. It  had a  conical top,  slightly
flattened at the summit.
'That  is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road,  which we have left
