keep  both  dry-footed and  on  their  proper  course.  At  first  they made
fan-progress,  but as  they  went on, their passage  became slower  and more
dangerous.  The marshes were bewildering and  treacherous, and there was  no
permanent trail even for Rangers  to find through their shifting  quagmires.
The  flies began  to torment them, and the air was full  of  clouds of  tiny
midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair.
'I  am being eaten alive!'  cried  Pippin. 'Midgewater!  There are more
midges than water!'
'What  do  they live  on  when  they  can't  get  hobbit?'  asked  Sam,
scratching his neck.
They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their
camping-place  was  damp, cold,  and uncomfortable;  and the  biting insects
would not let  them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the
reeds  and tussocks that from  the sound  of them were evil relatives of the
cricket.  There  were  thousands  of  them,  and  they  squeaked all  round,
neek-breek,  breek-neek,        unceasingly all the night, until the  hobbits  were
nearly frantic.
The  next day,  the fourth, was little  better, and the night almost as
comfortless. Though  the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them)  had been  left
behind, the midges still pursued them.
As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that
far away  there came  a light in the eastern sky: it  flashed and faded many
times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off.
'What is the  light?'  he said  to  Strider,  who had  risen,  and  was
standing, gazing ahead into the night.
'I do  not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make  out. It
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.'
Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure  of Strider,  standing silent
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.
They had not  gone  far  on  the  fifth day  when  they  left  the last
straggling pools and  reed-beds of the marshes  behind them. The land before
them began steadily  to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could
now  see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the  right of  the line
and  a little  separated from the  others. It  had a  conical top,  slightly
flattened at the summit.
'That  is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road,  which we have left
far  away on our right, runs to the south  of it and passes not far from its
foot. We  might  reach it by noon tomorrow, if we  go straight towards it. I
suppose we had better do so.'
'What do you mean?' asked Frodo.
'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It
is close to the Road.'
'But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?'
'Yes; but the hope is faint.  If he comes  this way at  all, he may not
pass through  Bree, and so  he may not know  what we  are doing. And anyway,
unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will
not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find
us in the wilderness,  they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It
commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there  are many birds and  beasts in
this country that  could see us,  as we stand here, from that hill-top.  Not
all the  birds are to be trusted,  and there are other spies more  evil than
they are.'
The hobbits looked  anxiously at  the distant hills. Sam looked up into
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks  or eagles hovering over them with bright
unfriendly eyes. 'You do make me feel uncomfortable  and lonesome, Strider!'
he said.
'What do you advise us to do?' asked Frodo.
'I  think,' answered Strider  slowly, as  if he was not quite sure,  'I
think the best thing is to  go as straight eastward from  here as we can, to
make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I
know that runs at their feet; it will  bring us to Weathertop from the north
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.'
All that day they plodded along, until the cold  and early evening came
down.  The  land  became  drier and more barren;  but  mists and vapours lay
behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy  birds were piping and wailing,
until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then  an empty
silence fell.  The hobbits  thought  of  the  soft light of sunset  glancing
through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away.
At  the day's  end  they came to a stream  that wandered  down from the
hills to lose  itself  in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its
banks while the light  lasted. It was already night when at last they halted
and made  their  camp under some stunted alder-trees  by  the shores of  the
stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky  sky the bleak and treeless
backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did
not  sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night-hours a  cold
grey light lay on the land.
Next morning they set out  again soon after sunrise.  There was a frost
in the air, and the  sky was a  pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed,
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used
to much walking  on short commons  - shorter  at  any rate than  what in the
Shire they  would have thought barely enough  to  keep them  on  their legs.
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been.
'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the  thinning process will not go on
indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'
'Do  not  speak  of  such  things!'  said  Strider  quickly,  and  with
surprising earnestness.
The  hills drew nearer.  They  made an  undulating  ridge, often rising
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or
passes leading into  the eastern land  beyond.  Along the crest of the ridge
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and
dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins  of old works of stone.
By night they had reached  the feet of the westward  slopes, and there  they
camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, and they were six days out
from Bree.
In the morning  they  found, for the first time since they had left the
Chetwood,  a  track  plain  to  see.  They  turned  right  and  followed  it
southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep
as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of
the  flats to the west. It dived into  dells,  and hugged steep  banks;  and
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there
were lines of large  boulders and hewn stones that  screened the  travellers
almost like a hedge.
'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walked
along one of  these  avenues, where  the  stones  were unusually  large  and
closely  set. 'I am  not  sure that I like  it: it  has  a - well, rather  a
barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?'
'No. There  is no barrow on  Weathertop, nor  on  any of these  hills,'
answered Strider. 'The  Men of  the West  did not live here; though in their
latter days they defended  the hills for a while against  the evil that came
