'No,  don't give  the  ring  to  me,'  said  Gandalf. 'Put  it  on  the
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough  there, till Frodo comes.  I  shall wait
for him.'
Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as  he was about to set it by the
clock, his hand jerked back, and the  packet fell  on  the floor.  Before he
could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and  set it in its place.
A spasm  of anger passed swiftly over  the hobbit's  face again. Suddenly it
gave way to a look of relief and a laugh. 'Well, that's that,' he said. 'Now
I'm off!'
They went out into the hall.  Bilbo chose  his favourite stick from the
stand; then he  whistled.  Three  dwarves came out of  different rooms where
they had been busy.
'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and labelled?'
'Everything,' they answered.
'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door.
It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked
up,  sniffing  the air. 'What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the Road
with dwarves!  This  is  what  I  have  really  been longing for, for years!
Good-bye!  ' he said, looking  at  his old  home and  bowing  to  the  door.
'Good-bye, Gandalf!'
'Good-bye, for the present,  Bilbo. Take  care of yourself! You are old
enough, and perhaps wise enough.'
'Take care! I  don't care. Don't  you worry about me! I am as happy now
as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come.
I am being swept off my feet at last,' he added, and then in a low voice, as
if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with eager feet,
Until it joins some larger way
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
He  paused, silent for a moment.  Then without another  word he  turned
away from the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his
three  companions  went round  into  his garden,  and trotted  down the long
sloping path. He  jumped over  a low place in the hedge  at the bottom,  and
took to the meadows, passing into the night like a  rustle  of wind  in  the
grass.
Gandalf  remained for a  while  staring  after  him  into the darkness.
'Goodbye,  my dear Bilbo  - until our next meeting!' he said softly and went
back indoors.
Frodo came  in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep
in thought. 'Has he gone?' he asked.
'Yes,' answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last.'
' I wish - I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,'
said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart  that he  really  meant to go. He always
used to  joke about serious things. I  wish  I had come back sooner, just to
see him off.'
I  think really  he preferred slipping off quietly  in the  end,'  said
Gandalf. 'Don't be too troubled. He'll be all right -  now. He left a packet
for you. There it is!'
Frodo  took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and  glanced  at it, but
did not open it.
'You'll find  his  will and all the other documents in there, I think,'
said  the  wizard.  'You  are  the master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy,
you'll find a golden ring.'
'The ring!' exclaimed Frodo. 'Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still,
it may be useful.'
'It may, and it  may  not,' said Gandalf. 'I should not make use of it,
if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.'
As master of Bag End Frodo felt  it his painful duty to say good-bye to
the guests. Rumours of strange events had by  now spread all over the field,
but  Frodo would  only say          no doubt everything will be  cleared  up  in the
morning.      About  midnight carriages  came for the important folk. One by one
they rolled away, filled with full but  very  unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners
came   by  arrangement,   and  removed  in  wheel-barrows  those   that  had
inadvertently remained behind.
Night slowly  passed.  The  sun  rose. The  hobbits rose  rather later.
Morning  went  on.  People  came  and began (by  orders) to  clear away  the
pavilions  and the  tables  and the chairs,  and the  spoons and  knives and
bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and
the  crumbs  and   cracker-paper,  the  forgotten   bags  and   gloves   and
handkerchiefs,  and  the uneaten food (a very small  item). Then a number of
other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and
Tooks, and other  guests that lived or  were staying near.  By mid-day, when
even the best-fed were out and about again,  there  was a large crowd at Bag
End, uninvited but not unexpected.
Frodo  was waiting on the step, smiling, but  looking rather  tired and
worried. He welcomed all  the callers,  but he had not much more to say than
before. His reply to all inquiries  was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo  Baggins has
gone away; as far as I know, for good.'  Some of  the visitors he invited to
come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them.
Inside in the  hall there  was piled a large assortment of packages and
parcels and small articles  of furniture.  On  every item there was  a label
tied. There were several labels of this sort:
For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo,                        on an umbrella.
Adelard
had carried off many unlabelled ones.
For  DORA BAGGINS in  memory  of  a LONG correspondence, with love
from
Bilbo,   on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldest
surviving female  relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine,  and had
written reams of good advice for more than half a century.
For  MILO BURROWS,  hoping it will be  useful, from B.B.,                   on a gold pen
and ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters.
For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo,               on a round convex mirror. She
was
a young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face shapely.
For  the  collection  of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE,  from a  contributor,                         on an
(empty) book-case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than  usual
at returning them.
For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS,  as  a PRESENT,                           on  a  case  of
silver
spoons. Bilbo  believed that  she had  acquired a good  many of  his spoons,
while he was away  on his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When
she arrived later in the day, she took the point  at once, but she also took
the spoons.
This  is  only  a  small  selection of  the assembled presents. Bilbo's
residence had got rather cluttered up  with things in the course of his long
