backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did
not  sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night-hours a  cold
grey light lay on the land.
Next morning they set out  again soon after sunrise.  There was a frost
in the air, and the  sky was a  pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed,
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used
to much walking  on short commons  - shorter  at  any rate than  what in the
Shire they  would have thought barely enough  to  keep them  on  their legs.
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been.
'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the  thinning process will not go on
indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'
'Do  not  speak  of  such  things!'  said  Strider  quickly,  and  with
surprising earnestness.
The  hills drew nearer.  They  made an  undulating  ridge, often rising
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or
passes leading into  the eastern land  beyond.  Along the crest of the ridge
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and
dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins  of old works of stone.
By night they had reached  the feet of the westward  slopes, and there  they
camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, and they were six days out
from Bree.
In the morning  they  found, for the first time since they had left the
Chetwood,  a  track  plain  to  see.  They  turned  right  and  followed  it
southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep
as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of
the  flats to the west. It dived into  dells,  and hugged steep  banks;  and
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there
were lines of large  boulders and hewn stones that  screened the  travellers
almost like a hedge.
'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walked
along one of  these  avenues, where  the  stones  were unusually  large  and
closely  set. 'I am  not  sure that I like  it: it  has  a - well, rather  a
barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?'
'No. There  is no barrow on  Weathertop, nor  on  any of these  hills,'
answered Strider. 'The  Men of  the West  did not live here; though in their
latter days they defended  the hills for a while against  the evil that came
out of Angmar.  This  path was made to serve the  forts along the walls. But
long before,  in the first  days of  the North  Kingdom, they built  a great
watch-tower  on  Weathertop,  Amon  Syl  they called  it.  It was burned and
broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown
on  the old hill's head.  Yet once it was tall and  fair.  It is  told  that
Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in
the days of the Last Alliance.'
The  hobbits gazed  at Strider. It seemed  that he  was  learned in old
lore, as well as in  the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry;
but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low
voice murmured:
Gil-galad was an Elven-king.
Of him the harpers sadly sing:
the last whose realm was fair and free
between the Mountains and the Sea.
His sword was long, his lance was keen,
his shining helm afar was seen;
the countless stars of heaven's field
were mirrored in his silver shield.
But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his star
in Mordor where the shadows are.
The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's.
'Don't stop!' said Merry.
'That's all I know,' stammered  Sam, blushing.  'I learned  it from Mr.
Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to  tell me tales  like that, knowing  how I
was always one for  hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo  as taught  me  my
letters.  He was  mighty  book-learned was dear  old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote
poetry.   He wrote what I have just said.'
'He did  not make it up,' said Strider. 'It  is pan of the lay  that is
called  The Fall of Gil-galad,        which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have
translated it. I never knew that.'
'There was a lot more,' said Sam,  'all about  Mordor.  I  didn't learn
that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way
myself!'
'Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!'
'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider.
It was  already  mid-day  when they  drew near the southern end of  the
path, and saw before them,  in the pale  clear light  of the  October sun, a
grey-green bank, leading up like a  bridge on to  the northward slope of the
hill They decided to make for the top at once,  while the daylight was broad
Concealment was no longer  possible,  and they could only hope that no enemy
or spy was observing  them. Nothing  was to be seen  moving  on the hill. If
Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him.
On the western flank  of Weathertop they  found a  sheltered hollow, at
the  bottom of which  there was  a bowl-shaped dell with grassy sides. There
they left  Sam  and Pippin with the pony and  their  packs and  luggage. The
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the
crown  of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last
slope had been steep and rocky.
On  the top they found,  as  Strider had said,  a wide  ring of ancient
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a
cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as  if with fire.
About them  the turf  was  burned to the roots and all within the  ring  the
grass was scorched  and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but
there was no sign of any living thing.
Standing upon the  rim of the ruined circle,  they saw all round  below
them a  wide  prospect,  for the most pan of  lands empty  and  featureless,
except for patches of woodland away to the  south, beyond which  they caught
here and  there  the glint of  distant water. Beneath them  on this southern
side there  ran  like  a  ribbon  the Old Road,  coming  out of the West and
winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east.
Nothing was moving on it. Following  its line eastward  with their eyes they
saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre;
behind them stood taller shapes of  grey, and  behind  those again were
high white peaks glimmering among the clouds.
'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very  cheerless and uninviting it
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't
blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.'
'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first.  He can ride
