myself!'
'Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!'
'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider.
It was  already  mid-day  when they  drew near the southern end of  the
path, and saw before them,  in the pale  clear light  of the  October sun, a
grey-green bank, leading up like a  bridge on to  the northward slope of the
hill They decided to make for the top at once,  while the daylight was broad
Concealment was no longer  possible,  and they could only hope that no enemy
or spy was observing  them. Nothing  was to be seen  moving  on the hill. If
Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him.
On the western flank  of Weathertop they  found a  sheltered hollow, at
the  bottom of which  there was  a bowl-shaped dell with grassy sides. There
they left  Sam  and Pippin with the pony and  their  packs and  luggage. The
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the
crown  of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last
slope had been steep and rocky.
On  the top they found,  as  Strider had said,  a wide  ring of ancient
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a
cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as  if with fire.
About them  the turf  was  burned to the roots and all within the  ring  the
grass was scorched  and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but
there was no sign of any living thing.
Standing upon the  rim of the ruined circle,  they saw all round  below
them a  wide  prospect,  for the most pan of  lands empty  and  featureless,
except for patches of woodland away to the  south, beyond which  they caught
here and  there  the glint of  distant water. Beneath them  on this southern
side there  ran  like  a  ribbon  the Old Road,  coming  out of the West and
winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east.
Nothing was moving on it. Following  its line eastward  with their eyes they
saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre;
behind them stood taller shapes of  grey, and  behind  those again were
high white peaks glimmering among the clouds.
'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very  cheerless and uninviting it
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't
blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.'
'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first.  He can ride
very swiftly when need presses.' Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone
on the top of the  cairn; it was flatter than the others, and  whiter, as if
it had escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning  it in his
fingers. "This has been  handled recently,' he said.  'What do you  think of
these marks?'
On  the flat under-side Frodo saw  some scratches: 'There seems to he a
stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,' he said.
'The stroke  on the left  might  be a G-rune  with thin branches,' said
Strider. 'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The
scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the  marks might mean
something  quite  different, and have  nothing  to do  with us.  Rangers use
runes, and they come here sometimes.'
'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry
'I  should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and  were a
sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now.
It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he
had no time or  did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is
so, we must be wary.'
'I wish we could  feel  sure that he made  the marks, whatever they may
mean,' said Frodo 'It would be a  great  comfort to  know that he was on the
way, in front of us or behind us.'
'Perhaps,' said  Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was  here, and
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that
we saw three  nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to  my  mind. I guess
that he was attacked on this hill-top,  but with what result  I cannot tell.
He  is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own
way to Rivendell, as best we can '
'How far  is  Rivendell?' asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The  world
looked wild and wide from Weathertop.
'I don't know if the Road has  ever  been measured in miles  beyond the
Forsaken Inn,      a day's  journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say it
is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road,  and folk are  glad
to reach their  journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know
how long it would  take me on  my  own  feet,  with fair  weather and no ill
fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses
the Loudwater that  runs  out of Rivendell. We  have at  least a fortnight's
journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.'
'A fortnight!' said Frodo. 'A lot may happen in that time.'
'It may,' said Strider.
They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward edge.
In  that  lonely  place   Frodo  for  the  first  time  fully  realized  his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in
the quiet  and beloved Shire.  He  stared down at the hateful Road,  leading
back westward - to his  home.  Suddenly he  was aware that  two black specks
were moving slowly along  it,  going westward; and looking again he saw that
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched
Strider's arm.
'Look,' he said, pointing downwards.
At once Strider flung  himself on  the ground behind the ruined circle,
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.
'What is it?' he whispered.
'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider.
Slowly  they crawled  up  to the edge of  the  ring  again,  and peered
through a cleft  between two jagged  stones. The light was no longer bright,
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now
overtaken  the sun,  as it  began to go  down.  They could all see the black
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain;
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black  Riders assembling
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill.
'Yes,'  said  Strider,  whose keener sight left him  in no  doubt. 'The
enemy is here!'
Hastily they crept away  and slipped down the north side of the hill to
find their companions.
Sam and  Peregrin had not been  idle. They  had explored the small dell
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they  found a spring of clear water
in the hillside, and near it footprints not  more than  a day or two old. In
the dell itself they  found  recent traces of a fire, and  other  signs of a
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of  the dell nearest to
the  hill.  Behind  them  Sam  came upon  a  small store of  firewood neatly
stacked.
'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.'
Strider  was greatly interested in  these discoveries.  'I  wish I  had
waited and explored the  ground  down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to
