'A fortnight!' said Frodo. 'A lot may happen in that time.'
'It may,' said Strider.
They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward edge.
In  that  lonely  place   Frodo  for  the  first  time  fully  realized  his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in
the quiet  and beloved Shire.  He  stared down at the hateful Road,  leading
back westward - to his  home.  Suddenly he  was aware that  two black specks
were moving slowly along  it,  going westward; and looking again he saw that
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched
Strider's arm.
'Look,' he said, pointing downwards.
At once Strider flung  himself on  the ground behind the ruined circle,
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.
'What is it?' he whispered.
'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider.
Slowly  they crawled  up  to the edge of  the  ring  again,  and peered
through a cleft  between two jagged  stones. The light was no longer bright,
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now
overtaken  the sun,  as it  began to go  down.  They could all see the black
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain;
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black  Riders assembling
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill.
'Yes,'  said  Strider,  whose keener sight left him  in no  doubt. 'The
enemy is here!'
Hastily they crept away  and slipped down the north side of the hill to
find their companions.
Sam and  Peregrin had not been  idle. They  had explored the small dell
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they  found a spring of clear water
in the hillside, and near it footprints not  more than  a day or two old. In
the dell itself they  found  recent traces of a fire, and  other  signs of a
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of  the dell nearest to
the  hill.  Behind  them  Sam  came upon  a  small store of  firewood neatly
stacked.
'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.'
Strider  was greatly interested in  these discoveries.  'I  wish I  had
waited and explored the  ground  down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to
the spring to examine the footprints.
'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back.  'Sam  and Pippin
have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangers
have been  here lately. It  is  they who left the firewood behind. But there
are also  several newer tracks  that were not made by Rangers. At least  one
set was made, only a day or two ago, by  heavy boots. At least one. I cannot
now be certain, but  I think  there were many booted feet.'  He  paused  and
stood in anxious thought.
Each of the hobbits  saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted
Riders. If the horsemen had already  found  the dell, the sooner Strider led
them  somewhere else  the better. Sam viewed  the hollow with great dislike,
now that he had heard news of their  enemies on the  Road, only a few  miles
away.
'Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr.  Strider?' he asked impatiently.
'It  is getting late,  and  I  don't like this  hole: it makes my heart sink
somehow.'
'Yes,  we certainly must decide what to do  at once,' answered Strider,
looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said at
last,  'I do not  like  this  place either; but  I  cannot think of anywhere
better  that we could  reach before nightfall.  At least we are out of sight
for the  moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by
spies.  All we could  do would be to go right out  of our way back north  on
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is
here. The  Road  is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried  to
take cover  in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.'
'Can the Riders    see?'   asked Merry. 'I mean, they seem  usually  to have
used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the
right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you
saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.'
'I was too careless  on the  hill-top,' answered  Strider. 'I  was very
anxious to  find some  sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us
to go up and  stand  there  so long.  For the black horses  can see, and the
Riders can use men and other creatures as  spies, as we found at Bree.  They
themselves  do not see the  world of light as we  do,  but our  shapes  cast
shadows in  their  minds, which only the  noon sun destroys; and in the dark
they perceive many  signs and forms that are hidden from us:  then they  are
most to be feared. And at all times  they smell the blood  of living things,
desiring and hating it. Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We
can feel their  presence - it troubled our hearts, as  soon as we came here,
and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his
voice sank to a whisper, 'the Ring draws them.'
'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!'
Strider laid  his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said.
'You are not alone. Let us take  this wood that is set ready for the fire as
a sign. There  is little  shelter or defence here,  but fire shall serve for
both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can  all things, but these
Riders do  not love it, and  fear those who wield  it. Fire is our friend in
the wilderness.'
'Maybe,'  muttered Sam.  'It  is also as good a way of saying "here  we
are" as I can think of, bar shouting.'
Down in  the  lowest and most  sheltered corner of the dell  they lit a
fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of  evening began to fall, and it grew
cold.  They  were  suddenly  aware of great  hunger,  for they had not eaten
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.
The  lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly  places
deserted by all the races of the  world. Rangers passed  at times beyond the
hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of
evil sort: trolls might stray down at times  out of  the northern valleys of
the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road  would travellers be found, most often
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their  own, and with no help  and few
words to spare for strangers.
'I don't see how our food can be  made  to  last,' said Frodo. 'We have
been careful  enough in the last few days, and  this supper is no feast; but
we have used  more than we ought,  if  we  have two weeks  still to go,  and
perhaps more.'
'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry,  root, and herb; and
I have  some skill as  a  hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving
before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work,
and  we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables
of Elrond's house!'
The  cold increased as darkness came  on. Peering out from the  edge of
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now  vanishing  quickly into
