most to be feared. And at all times  they smell the blood  of living things,
desiring and hating it. Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We
can feel their  presence - it troubled our hearts, as  soon as we came here,
and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his
voice sank to a whisper, 'the Ring draws them.'
'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!'
Strider laid  his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said.
'You are not alone. Let us take  this wood that is set ready for the fire as
a sign. There  is little  shelter or defence here,  but fire shall serve for
both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can  all things, but these
Riders do  not love it, and  fear those who wield  it. Fire is our friend in
the wilderness.'
'Maybe,'  muttered Sam.  'It  is also as good a way of saying "here  we
are" as I can think of, bar shouting.'
Down in  the  lowest and most  sheltered corner of the dell  they lit a
fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of  evening began to fall, and it grew
cold.  They  were  suddenly  aware of great  hunger,  for they had not eaten
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.
The  lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly  places
deserted by all the races of the  world. Rangers passed  at times beyond the
hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of
evil sort: trolls might stray down at times  out of  the northern valleys of
the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road  would travellers be found, most often
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their  own, and with no help  and few
words to spare for strangers.
'I don't see how our food can be  made  to  last,' said Frodo. 'We have
been careful  enough in the last few days, and  this supper is no feast; but
we have used  more than we ought,  if  we  have two weeks  still to go,  and
perhaps more.'
'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry,  root, and herb; and
I have  some skill as  a  hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving
before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work,
and  we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables
of Elrond's house!'
The  cold increased as darkness came  on. Peering out from the  edge of
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now  vanishing  quickly into
shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling
stars. Frodo and  his companions  huddled  round the fire, wrapped  in every
garment and  blanket they possessed;  but Strider was  content with a single
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe.
As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out  brightly he
began to  tell  them  tales  to keep their minds  from  fear. He  knew  many
histories and legends  of long ago,  of Elves  and Men and the good and evil
deeds of the Elder Days. They  wondered how  old he was,  and  where he  had
learned all this lore.
'Tell us of Gil-galad,' said Merry suddenly, when he paused  at the end
of a story of the Elf-Kingdoms. 'Do you  know any more  of that old lay that
you spoke of?'
'I do indeed,' answered Strider. 'So also does Frodo,  for  it concerns
us closely.' Merry  and Pippin looked at Frodo,  who  was  staring  into the
fire.
'I know  only the little that Gandalf has  told me,' said Frodo slowly.
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is
Starlight   in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land
of------'
'No!' said Strider  interrupting, 'I do not think that tale  should  be
told now with  the servants of the Enemy  at hand. If we  win through to the
house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.'
'Then  tell  us  some other tale of  the old days,' begged Sam; 'a tale
about  the Elves before the  fading time.  I would dearly  like to hear more
about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.'
'I will tell you the tale of Tin®viel,' said  Strider,  'in brief - for
it  is a long tale  of which the end is  not known; and  there are none now,
except  Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old.  It is a fair
tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may
lift up your hearts.' He was silent for some  time, and then he began not to
speak but to chant softly:
The leaves were long, the grass was green,
The hemlock-umbels tall and fair,
And in the glade a light was seen
Of stars in shadow shimmering.
Tin®viel was dancing there
To music of a pipe unseen,
And light of stars was in her hair,
And in her raiment glimmering.
There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.
He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wander flowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.
Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;
And forth he hastened, strong and fleet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She tightly fled on dancing feet,
And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.
He heard there oft the flying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves,
Or music welling underground,
In hidden hollows quavering.
Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering.
He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering.
Her mantle glinted in the moon,
As on a hill-top high and far
She danced, and at her feet was strewn
