And light of stars was in her hair,
And in her raiment glimmering.
There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.
He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wander flowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.
Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;
And forth he hastened, strong and fleet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She tightly fled on dancing feet,
And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.
He heard there oft the flying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves,
Or music welling underground,
In hidden hollows quavering.
Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering.
He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering.
Her mantle glinted in the moon,
As on a hill-top high and far
She danced, and at her feet was strewn
A mist of silver quivering.
When winter passed, she came again,
And her song released the sudden spring,
Like rising lark, and falling rain,
And melting water bubbling.
He saw the elven-flowers spring
About her feet, and healed again
He longed by her to dance and sing
Upon the grass untroubling.
Again she fled, but swift he came.
Tin®viel! Tin®viel!
He called her by her elvish name;
And there she halted listening.
One moment stood she, and a spell
His voice laid on her: Beren came,
And doom fell on Tin®viel
That in his arms lay glistening.
As Beren looked into her eyes
Within the shadows of her hair,
The trembling starlight of the skies
He saw there mirrored shimmering.
Tin®viel the elven-fair,
Immortal maiden elven-wise,
About him cast her shadowy hair
And arms like silver glimmering.
Long was the way that fate them bore,
O'er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.
Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again.  'That is a song,'  he
said, 'in the mode that  is called       ann-thennath      among the Elves, but is hard
to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells
of the meeting of Beren son  of  Barahir and  L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was  a
mortal man,  but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol,  a King  of Elves upon
Middle-earth when the world was young; and  she was the fairest  maiden that
has ever been among all  the children of this world. As  the stars above the
mists  of  the Northern  lands was her loveliness,  and  in her  face  was a
shining light. In those days  the Great Enemy, of  whom Sauron of Mordor was
but a servant, dwelt  in Angband  in the North,  and the  Elves of the  West
coming back to Middle-earth made  war upon him to regain the Silmarils which
he had  stolen; and  the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the  Enemy  was
victorious  and Barahir  was slain,  and Beren escaping through great  peril
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in  the
forest of Neldoreth.  There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade
beside the enchanted  river Esgalduin; and  he named  her Tin®viel,  that is
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and
they  were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from  the dungeons of Sauron,
and together they passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great
Enemy  from  his  throne, and took  from  his  iron  crown one of the  three
Silmarils, brightest of  all jewels, to  be  the  bride-price of L®thien  to
Thingol her father. Yet  at the last  Beren  was slain by the Wolf that came
from  the gates  of  Angband, and he died in  the arms of Tin®viel.  But she
chose mortality, and to die from  the world,  so that  she might follow him;
and it  is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering  Seas, and  after a
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed,
long ago, beyond the confines of this  world. So it is that L®thien Tin®viel
alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left  the  world, and they have
lost her  whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of
old descended among  Men.  There live  still those of whom  L®thien  was the
foremother,  and  it  is  said  that  her line shall  never fail.  Elrond of
Rivendell is of that Kin. For of  Beren and L®thien  was born Dior Thingol's
heir;  and of him Elwing  the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril
upon  his brow.  And  of  Edrendil  came  the  Kings  of  N®menor,  that  is
Westernesse.'
As Strider was speaking  they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit
