Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again.  'That is a song,'  he
said, 'in the mode that  is called       ann-thennath      among the Elves, but is hard
to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells
of the meeting of Beren son  of  Barahir and  L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was  a
mortal man,  but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol,  a King  of Elves upon
Middle-earth when the world was young; and  she was the fairest  maiden that
has ever been among all  the children of this world. As  the stars above the
mists  of  the Northern  lands was her loveliness,  and  in her  face  was a
shining light. In those days  the Great Enemy, of  whom Sauron of Mordor was
but a servant, dwelt  in Angband  in the North,  and the  Elves of the  West
coming back to Middle-earth made  war upon him to regain the Silmarils which
he had  stolen; and  the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the  Enemy  was
victorious  and Barahir  was slain,  and Beren escaping through great  peril
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in  the
forest of Neldoreth.  There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade
beside the enchanted  river Esgalduin; and  he named  her Tin®viel,  that is
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and
they  were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from  the dungeons of Sauron,
and together they passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great
Enemy  from  his  throne, and took  from  his  iron  crown one of the  three
Silmarils, brightest of  all jewels, to  be  the  bride-price of L®thien  to
Thingol her father. Yet  at the last  Beren  was slain by the Wolf that came
from  the gates  of  Angband, and he died in  the arms of Tin®viel.  But she
chose mortality, and to die from  the world,  so that  she might follow him;
and it  is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering  Seas, and  after a
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed,
long ago, beyond the confines of this  world. So it is that L®thien Tin®viel
alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left  the  world, and they have
lost her  whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of
old descended among  Men.  There live  still those of whom  L®thien  was the
foremother,  and  it  is  said  that  her line shall  never fail.  Elrond of
Rivendell is of that Kin. For of  Beren and L®thien  was born Dior Thingol's
heir;  and of him Elwing  the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril
upon  his brow.  And  of  Edrendil  came  the  Kings  of  N®menor,  that  is
Westernesse.'
As Strider was speaking  they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit
in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich and
deep. Above him was a black starry  sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over
the crown  of Weathertop behind  him. The  waxing  moon  was climbing
slowly
above  the  hill that  overshadowed  them, and the  stars above the hill-top
faded.
The  story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said  Merry.
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.'
The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the  top of  the
hill something small and dark  against  the  glimmer of the moonrise. It was
perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light.
Sam  and Merry  got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo  and Pippin
remained seated in silence.  Strider was watching the moonlight on  the hill
intently.  All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt  a cold dread creeping
over his heart,  now that Strider was  no longer speaking. He huddled closer
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell.
'I don't  know what it is,'  he  said, 'but  I suddenly felt afraid.  I
durstn't  go  outside this dell  for any money;  I felt that  something  was
creeping up the slope.'
'Did you   see  anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet.
'No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.'
'I  saw something,' said Merry; 'or  I thought  I did -  away westwards
where  the moonlight was  falling  on  the  flats  beyond the  shadow of the
hill-tops, I  thought    there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be
moving this way.'
'Keep close to the  fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Get
some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!'
For a breathless  time  they sat there, silent  and  alert, with  their
backs  turned to the  wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled
them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or  movement in the night.
Frodo
stirred,  feeling that he must break the silence:  he longed  to  shout  out
aloud.
'Hush!' whispered Strider.  'What's  that?' gasped Pippin at  the  same
moment.
Over the  lip of the little dell, on the side away  from the hill, they
felt, rather  than saw, a shadow  rise,  one  shadow or  more than one. They
strained their eyes, and the shadows  seemed to grow. Soon there could be no
doubt:
three or four  tall black  figures  were standing  there  on the slope,
looking down  on  them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes
in the deep shade behind them. Frodo  thought that he heard  a faint hiss as
of venomous breath  and felt a thin  piercing chill. Then the  shapes slowly
advanced.
Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his
companions; he  was quaking  as  if he was bitter cold,  but his  terror was
swallowed  up in  a sudden temptation  to put on the Ring. The  desire to do
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He did not forget
the Barrow,  nor  the  message  of  Gandalf;  but  something  seemed  to  be
compelling  him to disregard  all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt
that he must take the Ring and put  it on his finger. He could not speak. He
felt Sam looking at him, as if  he knew  that  his  master was in some great
trouble, but  he could not turn  towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled
for a while; but  resistance became unbearable, and at  last he  slowly drew
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand.
Immediately, though everything  else remained as before,  dim and dark,
the shapes became  terribly clear. He was able to  see beneath  their  black
wrappings. There were  five  tall  figures: two standing on the lip  of  the
dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned  keen and merciless eyes;
under their mantles were long grey robes;  upon  their grey hairs were helms
of silver; in their haggard hands  were  swords of steel. Their eyes fell on
him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he  drew his own
sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand.
Two of the figures  halted. The  third was taller than  the others: his hair
was long and gleaming and  on his  helm was  a crown.  In one hand he held a
long sword, and in the other a knife;  both the knife and the hand that held
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo.
At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on  the ground, and he heard
himself crying aloud: O         Elbereth! Gilthoniel!       At the same time he struck at
the feet of his enemy. A shrill  cry rang  out in the night;  and he felt  a
pain  like  a  dart  of  poisoned ice  pierce his left shoulder. Even  as he
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist,  a glimpse of Strider leaping
