strained their eyes, and the shadows  seemed to grow. Soon there could be no
doubt:
three or four  tall black  figures  were standing  there  on the slope,
looking down  on  them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes
in the deep shade behind them. Frodo  thought that he heard  a faint hiss as
of venomous breath  and felt a thin  piercing chill. Then the  shapes slowly
advanced.
Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his
companions; he  was quaking  as  if he was bitter cold,  but his  terror was
swallowed  up in  a sudden temptation  to put on the Ring. The  desire to do
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He did not forget
the Barrow,  nor  the  message  of  Gandalf;  but  something  seemed  to  be
compelling  him to disregard  all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt
that he must take the Ring and put  it on his finger. He could not speak. He
felt Sam looking at him, as if  he knew  that  his  master was in some great
trouble, but  he could not turn  towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled
for a while; but  resistance became unbearable, and at  last he  slowly drew
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand.
Immediately, though everything  else remained as before,  dim and dark,
the shapes became  terribly clear. He was able to  see beneath  their  black
wrappings. There were  five  tall  figures: two standing on the lip  of  the
dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned  keen and merciless eyes;
under their mantles were long grey robes;  upon  their grey hairs were helms
of silver; in their haggard hands  were  swords of steel. Their eyes fell on
him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he  drew his own
sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand.
Two of the figures  halted. The  third was taller than  the others: his hair
was long and gleaming and  on his  helm was  a crown.  In one hand he held a
long sword, and in the other a knife;  both the knife and the hand that held
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo.
At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on  the ground, and he heard
himself crying aloud: O         Elbereth! Gilthoniel!       At the same time he struck at
the feet of his enemy. A shrill  cry rang  out in the night;  and he felt  a
pain  like  a  dart  of  poisoned ice  pierce his left shoulder. Even  as he
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist,  a glimpse of Strider leaping
out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last
effort Frodo,  dropping  his sword, slipped  the Ring from  his  finger  and
closed his right hand tight upon it.
Chapter 12. Flight to the Ford
When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.
He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His
three companions were bending  over  him.  'What has happened? Where is  the
pale  king?' he  asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to  hear him speak to
answer  for  a  while; nor did they  understand  his question.  At length he
gathered from  Sam that they had seen nothing  but the vague shadowy  shapes
coming towards them.  Suddenly to his  horror Sam found  that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He
heard  Frodo's  voice, but it seemed to  come from a great distance, or from
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as  if  dead,  face downwards  on the
grass  with his sword  beneath  him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and
lay  him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now  a  good while
ago.
Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out  of the  shadows. They
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down
swiftly at his side.
'I  am not a Black  Rider,  Sam,' he said  gently, 'nor in league  with
them. I  have been  trying to discover  something of  their movements; but I
have  found nothing. I cannot  think  why  they have gone and do  not attack
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.'
When he heard what Frodo had  to tell, he became full  of concern,  and
shook his head  and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with  it.
'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up and
walked  away, and called  Sam to him.  'I think I  understand  things better
now,' he said in  a low voice.  'There  seem only to  have  been five of the
enemy. Why they were not all here,  I  don't know;  but I  don't  think they
expected to  be resisted.  They have drawn off for the  time being. But  not
far,  I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape.  They
are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that   their  purpose  is  almost
accomplished, and that the  Ring  cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that
