Chapter 12. Flight to the Ford
When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.
He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His
three companions were bending  over  him.  'What has happened? Where is  the
pale  king?' he  asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to  hear him speak to
answer  for  a  while; nor did they  understand  his question.  At length he
gathered from  Sam that they had seen nothing  but the vague shadowy  shapes
coming towards them.  Suddenly to his  horror Sam found  that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He
heard  Frodo's  voice, but it seemed to  come from a great distance, or from
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as  if  dead,  face downwards  on the
grass  with his sword  beneath  him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and
lay  him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now  a  good while
ago.
Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out  of the  shadows. They
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down
swiftly at his side.
'I  am not a Black  Rider,  Sam,' he said  gently, 'nor in league  with
them. I  have been  trying to discover  something of  their movements; but I
have  found nothing. I cannot  think  why  they have gone and do  not attack
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.'
When he heard what Frodo had  to tell, he became full  of concern,  and
shook his head  and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with  it.
'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up and
walked  away, and called  Sam to him.  'I think I  understand  things better
now,' he said in  a low voice.  'There  seem only to  have  been five of the
enemy. Why they were not all here,  I  don't know;  but I  don't  think they
expected to  be resisted.  They have drawn off for the  time being. But  not
far,  I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape.  They
are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that   their  purpose  is  almost
accomplished, and that the  Ring  cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that
they believe  your  master has a deadly  wound that will subdue him to their
will. We  shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't  despair!' said Strider.
'You  must trust  me  now. Your  Frodo is made of sterner  stuff  than I had
guessed, though Gandalf  hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and
I think he will  resist the evil power of the wound longer  than his enemies
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness.
Frodo  dozed, though the  pain  of his wound was slowly growing,  and a
deadly  chill  was spreading  from  his  shoulder to  his arm  and side. His
friends watched  over him, warming him,  and bathing  his  wound.  The night
passed  slowly  and wearily.  Dawn was growing in the sky, and the  dell was
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned.
'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the  ground a black cloak
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there
was a slash. 'This was the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurt
that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but  all blades perish
that pierce  that  dreadful  King.  More  deadly  to  him  was  the name  of
Elbereth.'
'And  more  deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw
that near the end  its edge was notched and  the  point was broken  off. But
even as he  held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only
the hilt in  Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he  cried. 'It was this accursed  knife
that gave the wound. Few now have the  skill in  healing to match  such evil
weapons. But I will do what I can.'
He sat down on the  ground, and taking  the dagger-hilt laid it  on his
knees, and he  sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it
aside, he turned to Frodo  and in  a soft tone  spoke words the others could
not catch.  From  the pouch at  his  belt he drew  out the  long leaves of a
plant.
'These  leaves,' he said, 'I have  walked far to  find; for  this plant
does not grow in the bare hills;  but in the thickets away south of the Road
I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his
fingers,  and it gave out  a  sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It  is fortunate
that  I could find it, for it is  a healing plant that the  Men of  the West
brought to Middle-earth.        Athelas    they  named it,  and it grows  now sparsely
and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old;  and it is not known
in the  North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It  has great
virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.'
He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had  also some  power over the wound, for
Frodo felt the pain  and also the  sense of  frozen cold lessen in his side;
but the life did not return to his arm, and  he could not  raise or  use his
hand.  He  bitterly  regretted his  foolishness, and reproached himself  for
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he
would  remain maimed for  life,  and how they would now  manage to  continue
their journey. He fell too weak to stand.
The others were discussing this very question. They  quickly decided to
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here,
then he  must have been forced to ride away, and  he will not return. In any
case we are in great peril here after  dark, since the attack of last night,
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.'
As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full, they had some hurried food  and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo  to  walk, so  they divided the  greater
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo  on the pony. In
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters,
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must  have been very hard for the
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life.
They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the
Road,  but. it was the  quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed
fuel; for Strider said  that Frodo must be kept warm,  especially at  night,
while fire would be some protection  for them all. It  was also his  plan to
shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards.
They made  their  way slowly  and  cautiously  round the  south-western
slopes  of the  hill, and came in a  little while to the  edge of the  Road.
There was no sign of the Riders. But  even as they were hurrying across they
heard far away two  cries: a cold voice calling and  a cold voice answering.
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The
