and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old;  and it is not known
in the  North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It  has great
virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.'
He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had  also some  power over the wound, for
Frodo felt the pain  and also the  sense of  frozen cold lessen in his side;
but the life did not return to his arm, and  he could not  raise or  use his
hand.  He  bitterly  regretted his  foolishness, and reproached himself  for
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he
would  remain maimed for  life,  and how they would now  manage to  continue
their journey. He fell too weak to stand.
The others were discussing this very question. They  quickly decided to
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here,
then he  must have been forced to ride away, and  he will not return. In any
case we are in great peril here after  dark, since the attack of last night,
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.'
As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full, they had some hurried food  and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo  to  walk, so  they divided the  greater
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo  on the pony. In
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters,
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must  have been very hard for the
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life.
They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the
Road,  but. it was the  quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed
fuel; for Strider said  that Frodo must be kept warm,  especially at  night,
while fire would be some protection  for them all. It  was also his  plan to
shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards.
They made  their  way slowly  and  cautiously  round the  south-western
slopes  of the  hill, and came in a  little while to the  edge of the  Road.
There was no sign of the Riders. But  even as they were hurrying across they
heard far away two  cries: a cold voice calling and  a cold voice answering.
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The
land before them  sloped  away  southwards, but  it was  wild  and pathless;
bushes and  stunted trees  grew in dense patches with wide barren  spaces in
between.  The grass was scanty, coarse,  and grey;  and  the leaves  in  the
thickets were faded and falling. It was  a cheerless land, and their journey
was slow and gloomy. They spoke  little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down,
and
their  backs bowed  under  their  burdens.  Even  Strider  seemed  tired and
heavy-hearted.
Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again,
but he did not speak of it for  a long time. Four  days passed,  without the
ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop
slowly
sank,  and  before  them the distant mountains loomed a  little nearer.  Yet
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked
their  flight or followed them.  They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch
in pairs by night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the
grey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled  moon; but they  saw nothing,  and
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once  did they
feel the sense of present  evil that  had assailed them before the attack in
the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already  lost their
trail again. Perhaps  they  were waiting  to  make  some ambush in  a narrow
place?
At the end of  the fifth day the ground began once more  to rise slowly
out of the wide  shallow valley into which  they had  descended. Strider now
turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached
the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far  ahead a huddle of wooded
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round  the  feet  of
the hills;  and  to  their  right  a  grey river  gleamed  pale in the  thin
sunshine. In the  distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley
half-veiled in mist.
"I am  afraid we must  go back  to  the Road  here for  a while,'  said
Strider.  'We have  now  come to  the  River Hoarwell,  that the Elves  call
Mitheithel. It  flows down out  of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells  north of
Rivendell,  and joins  the Loudwater away in the  South.  Some  call  it the
Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the  Sea. There is
no way over  it  below  its sources  in the Ettenmoors, except by  the  Last
Bridge on which the Road crosses.'
'What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry.
'That is Loudwater,  the Bruinen of Rivendell,'  answered Strider. 'The
Road runs along the edge of  the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the
Ford of Bruinen. But I have  not yet thought how  we shall cross that water.
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last
Bridge held against us.'
Next day, early in  the morning, they came down again to the borders of
the Road.  Sam  and  Strider  went  forward, but they found no  sign of  any
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see.
They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope.
They dreaded  to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider
made them take cover  in a  thicket at  the side of the Road, while  he went
forward to explore.
Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he
said,  'and I wonder very much what that  means. But  I have found something
very strange.'
He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it
in  the  mud in  the  middle of the  Bridge,' he said. 'It  is  a beryl,  an
elf-stone.  Whether it was set  there, or  let fall by chance, I cannot say;
but  it brings  hope to  me. I will take it as a sign that we may  pass  the
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep  to  the Road, without some  clearer
token.'
At once they went on again. They crossed  the Bridge in safety, hearing
no sound  but  the water  swirling  against its three great  arches. A  mile
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the
steep  lands  on  the left of the Road.  Here Strider turned aside, and soon
they were lost in a sombre  country of dark trees winding among the feet  of
sullen hills.
The hobbits were glad  to leave  the  cheerless lands and the  perilous
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here  and  there  upon
heights  and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls  of stone, and the
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo,  who was  not walking, had
