Bridge on which the Road crosses.'
'What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry.
'That is Loudwater,  the Bruinen of Rivendell,'  answered Strider. 'The
Road runs along the edge of  the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the
Ford of Bruinen. But I have  not yet thought how  we shall cross that water.
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last
Bridge held against us.'
Next day, early in  the morning, they came down again to the borders of
the Road.  Sam  and  Strider  went  forward, but they found no  sign of  any
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see.
They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope.
They dreaded  to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider
made them take cover  in a  thicket at  the side of the Road, while  he went
forward to explore.
Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he
said,  'and I wonder very much what that  means. But  I have found something
very strange.'
He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it
in  the  mud in  the  middle of the  Bridge,' he said. 'It  is  a beryl,  an
elf-stone.  Whether it was set  there, or  let fall by chance, I cannot say;
but  it brings  hope to  me. I will take it as a sign that we may  pass  the
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep  to  the Road, without some  clearer
token.'
At once they went on again. They crossed  the Bridge in safety, hearing
no sound  but  the water  swirling  against its three great  arches. A  mile
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the
steep  lands  on  the left of the Road.  Here Strider turned aside, and soon
they were lost in a sombre  country of dark trees winding among the feet  of
sullen hills.
The hobbits were glad  to leave  the  cheerless lands and the  perilous
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here  and  there  upon
heights  and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls  of stone, and the
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo,  who was  not walking, had
time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his  journey
and the  threatening towers on  the hills north of  the Road, in the country
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had  happened. Frodo
guessed that they were  now in the  same  region, and wondered if by  chance
they would pass near the spot.
'Who lives  in this land?'  he asked. 'And  who built these  towers? Is
this troll-country?'
'No!' said Strider. 'Trolls do  not  build. No one lives in  this land.
Men once dwelt  here, ages ago;  but  none remain  now. They  became an evil
people, as legends  tell, for they fell under  the shadow of Angmar. But all
were destroyed  in the war that  brought the North Kingdom to  its  end. But
that is now so long ago that the hills  have forgotten them, though a shadow
still lies on the land.'
'Where  did you learn  such  tales,  if  all  the  land  is  empty  and
forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The  birds and beasts do not tell tales of that
son.'
'The  heirs  of Elendil do not forget all  things past,'  said Strider;
'and  many more things than  I can tell are remembered in  Rivendell.' 'Have
you often  been to Rivendell?' said  Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt
there once, and still I return when I may.
There my heart is;  but  it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the
fair house of Elrond.'
The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to
the River Bruinen, but both were  now hidden  from view. The travellers came
into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark  and silent.  Trees with old
and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes
of pine-wood.
The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick
their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled
rocks. As long as they could they avoided  climbing  for  Frodo's  sake, and
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales.
They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The wind
began  to blow steadily  out  of  the West and pour the water of the distant
seas  on the  dark  heads of the hills in fine  drenching rain. By nightfall
they  were all soaked,  and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get
any  fire  to burn. The next  day the  hills rose still  higher  and steeper
before  them, and  they were forced to  turn away  northwards out  of  their
course. Strider seemed to  be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out
from Weathertop, and their stock of  provisions was beginning to run low. It
went on raining.
That night they camped on  a stony shelf with a rock-wall  behind them,
in which  there was a shallow cave,  a  mere scoop in the  cliff.  Frodo was
restless. The  cold and wet had  made his wound more painful  than ever, and
the ache and sense of deadly chill took  away all sleep.  He lay tossing and
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks
of  rock, water  dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling  fall of  a loosened
stone. He felt that black shapes  were advancing to smother him; but when he
sat up he saw nothing but  the back of  Strider  sitting hunched up, smoking
his pipe, and watching.  He lay down again and passed into an uneasy  dream,
in  which he  walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire,  but it seemed
faint  and dim, less clear  than the  tall black shadows that  stood looking
over the hedge.
In  the morning he  woke to  find that the rain had stopped. The clouds
were still thick,  but they were breaking, and pale strips of  blue appeared
between them.  The  wind was  shifting  again.  They  did  not start  early.
Immediately after  their cold  and  comfortless  breakfast Strider  went off
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he
came  back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie
of the land.
When  he returned he was not reassuring.  'We have come too  far to the
north,' he said, 'and we must find  some way to  turn back southwards again.
If we  keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north
of  Rivendell.  That is  troll-country,  and  little known  to  me. We could
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but
it would take  too long,  for I  do not know the way, and our food would not
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.'
The  rest of that day they  spent  scrambling over  rocky  ground. They
found  a passage between  two  hills that  led them into  a  valley  running
south-east, the  direction that they wished  to take; but towards the end of
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark
edge  against  the  sky was  broken  into many bare points like teeth  of  a
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it.
They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so  they
